THE MARNE
15 JULY–6 AUGUST 1918
THE U.S. ARMY
CAMPAIGNS OF WORLD WAR I
•••
•••
THE U.S. ARMY CAMPAIGNS OF WORLD WAR I
COMMEMORATIVE SERIES
Series Editor: Brian F. Neumann
The U.S. Army in the World War I Era
The Mexican Expedition, 1916–1917
Joining the Great War, April 1917–April 1918
Into the Fight, April–June 1918
The Marne, 15 July–6 August 1918
Supporting Allied Offensives, August–November 1918
St. Mihiel, 12–15 September 1918
Meuse-Argonne, 26 September–11 November 1918
Occupation and Demobilization
The Russian Expeditions, 1918–1920
Cover: The Rock of the Marne, by Mal Thompson
(The U.S. Army in Action series)
•••••••••••••••
CMH Pub 77–5
•••
THE MARNE
15 JULY–6 AUGUST 1918
by
Stephen C. McGeorge
and
Mason W. Watson
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Center of Military History
United States Army
Washington, D.C., 2018

•••• 5 ••••
•••
INTRODUCTION
A century ago, the great powers of Europe became engulfed
in what was then called the Great War. It signaled a new age in
armed conflict in which mass armies supported by industrial mass
production brought an unprecedented level of killing power to the
battlefield. By the time the United States entered the war in 1917,
the combatants were waging war on a scale never before seen
in history. The experience defined a generation and cast a long
shadow across the twentieth century. In addition to a tremendous
loss of life, the war shattered Europe, bringing revolution, the
collapse of long-standing empires, and economic turmoil, as
well as the birth of new nation-states and the rise of totalitarian
movements.
The modern U.S. Army, capable of conducting industrialized
warfare on a global scale, can trace its roots to the World War.
Although the war’s outbreak in August 1914 shocked most
Americans, they preferred to keep the conflict at arm’s length.
The United States declared its neutrality and invested in coastal
defenses and the Navy to guard its shores. The U.S. Army,
meanwhile, remained small, with a regiment as its largest standing
formation. Primarily a constabulary force, it focused on policing
America’s new territorial possessions in the Caribbean and Pacific
as it continued to adapt to Secretary of War Elihu Root’s reforms
in the years following the War with Spain. It was not until June
1916 that Congress authorized an expansion of the Army, dual
state-federal status for the National Guard, and the creation of a
reserve officer training corps.
In early 1917, relations between the United States and Germany
rapidly deteriorated. The kaiser’s policy of unrestricted submarine
warfare threatened American lives and commerce, and German
meddling in Mexican affairs convinced most Americans that Berlin
posed a danger to the nation. In April 1917, the president, out of
diplomatic options, asked Congress to declare war on Germany.
But the U.S. Army, numbering only 133,000 men, was far from
ready. The president ordered nearly 400,000 National Guardsmen
into federal service, and more than twenty-four million men
eventually registered for the Selective Service, America’s first
•••• 6 ••••
conscription since the Civil War. By the end of 1918, the Army had
grown to four million men and had trained 200,000 new officers
to lead them. As it expanded to address wartime needs, the Army
developed a new combined-arms formation—the square division.
Divisions fell under corps, and corps made up field armies. The
Army also created supporting elements such as the Air Service, the
Tank Corps, and the Chemical Warfare Service. The war signaled
the potential of the United States as not only a global economic
power, but also a military one.
In June 1917, the 1st Division deployed to France, arriving in time
to parade through Paris on the Fourth of July. The first National
Guard division, the 26th Division from New England, deployed in
September. By war’s end, the American Expeditionary Forces, as
the nation’s forces in Europe were called, had grown to two million
soldiers and more than forty divisions. During 1918, these American
“doughboys” learned to fight in battles of steadily increasing scale:
Cantigny, the Marne, Aisne-Marne, St. Mihiel, and Meuse-Argonne,
adding thirteen campaign streamers to the Army flag. Overall, in
roughly six months of combat, the American Expeditionary Forces
suffered more than 255,000 casualties, including 52,997 battle
deaths (as well as more than 50,000 nonbattle deaths, most due to
the influenza pandemic). The war that the United States entered to
“make the world safe for democracy” ended with an armistice on
11 November 1918, followed by a controversial peace. American
soldiers served in the Occupation of the Rhineland until 1923, before
withdrawing from Europe altogether.
The United States will never forget the American soldiers
who fought and died in the World War. America’s first unknown
soldier was laid to rest on 11 November 1921 in the Tomb of the
Unknown Soldier in Arlington National Cemetery, where soldiers
still stand guard. The United States created permanent American
military cemeteries in France, Belgium, and Britain to bury the
fallen. To this day, memorials to their sacrifice can be found across
America, and the date of the armistice has become a national
holiday honoring all those who serve in defense of the nation.
The last surviving U.S. Army veteran of the war died in 2011. It is
to all the doughboys, those who returned and those who did not,
that the U.S. Army Center of Military History dedicates these
commemorative pamphlets.
JON T. HOFFMAN
Chief Historian
•••• 7 ••••
•••
THE MARNE
15 JULY–6 AUGUST 1918
The Second Battle of the Marne was the turning point of
the First World War on the Western Front. Between March and
July 1918, the Germans launched four devastating offensives
that resulted in an advance unlike anything that had been seen
in four years of trench warfare. The German assault on the
Chemin des Dames at the end of May brought the German Army
back to the Marne River, where the Allies had halted its drive
on Paris in September 1914. For the second time in four years,
the Germans appeared to be on the cusp of victory. Between 15
and 17 July, however, American divisions along the Marne and
in Champagne played a decisive role in halting the last German
drive. The Allies then went on the offensive. On 18 July, the French
Army, which included multiple American divisions, initiated a
series of offensives that eventually pushed the Germans back
from the Marne to the Vesle River. The German Army would
remain on the defensive for the remainder of the war as the Allies
continued offensive operations from August until the Armistice
on 11 November 1918.
This commemorative pamphlet discusses the role of the
American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) in the fighting near the
Marne. The Second Battle of the Marne can be divided into two
phases. The first consists of the Franco-American defense of
15–17 July against German attacks aimed at capturing Reims.
The second covers the Allied counteroffensives between 18 July
and 6 August 1918. Both phases included critical contributions
by American troops, most notably in the initial Allied offensive
at Soissons. In total, Americans accounted for more than
40 percent of the Allied casualties sustained in the Second Battle
of the Marne. In addition, the battle saw AEF divisions fighting
side by side for the first time, as well as the eventual arrival of
American corps as operational units. The experience gained in
the fighting near the Marne would prove invaluable as the AEF
began independent operations in September.
•••• 8 ••••
Strategic Setting
By the spring of 1918, the German Empire’s window of
opportunity for victory in the war had nearly closed. Despite some
battlefield successes, Germany had failed in two major attempts
to defeat France—the initial invasion of France and Belgium in
1914, and the attritional assault on the fortress-city of Verdun in
1916. Rather than undertaking yet another offensive in the west
in 1917, the new heads of the German Army High Command
(Oberste Heeresleitung; OHL), Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg
and General Erich Ludendorff, opted for a strategy focused on
supporting Austria-Hungary and defeating the faltering Russian
Empire. In the meantime, Germany attempted to force Britain from
the war through a renewed submarine offensive. On land, Germany’s
“eastern strategy” was a success. By the end of 1917, Russia had
agreed to enter armistice negotiations with the Central Powers.
An Austro-German offensive against Italy in late 1917, the Battle of
Caporetto, also had impressive results—the Italian Army suffered a
stinging defeat, nearly resulting in the fall of Venice. At sea, however,
Germany’s U-boat campaign against Britain failed disastrously.
Instead of reducing the number of hostile powers arrayed against
Germany, the employment of “unrestricted submarine warfare”—
the sinking of civilian vessels without warning—led to the United
States entering the war as an “Associated Power” alongside
France and Britain. The first American troops arrived in France in
June, and more Americans continued to arrive in ever-increasing
numbers throughout the year. Germany’s strategic outlook at the
beginning of 1918 was therefore ambiguous. Although Russia’s
defeat opened new strategic possibilities, America’s entry into the
war gave the Allies an overwhelming advantage, at least in the long
term. Moreover, the German home front suffered from the Allied
blockade, now approaching its fifth year. The hungry, overworked,
and impoverished German populace was quickly losing its appetite
for “total war.”
Refusing to contemplate a negotiated peace, General
Ludendorff called for a resumption of offensive operations on the
Western Front in March 1918. Transferring roughly fifty divisions
from the closed Eastern Front, the Germans enjoyed a temporary
numerical superiority in the west of approximately 1.25 to 1. The
German Empire would never again have better odds. Utilizing elite
formations trained in infiltration tactics, Ludendorff intended to
crush the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) and drive it from
•••• 9 ••••
the continent before turning on the French Army. Lacking British
support, the French would then be forced to surrender, thereby
ending the war in the west well before significant American
forces arrived. Even though roughly 200,000 American soldiers
were already in France in March 1918, Ludendorff and the OHL
doubted that the novice American divisions could stand against
battle-hardened German troops.
The first German offensive, code-named Michael, seemed to
vindicate Ludendorff’s ambitious strategy. Launched on 21 March
1918, the offensive crashed through the thinly held defensive lines
of General Sir Hubert Gough’s British Fifth Army, which lay at
the juncture of the British and French armies, and seized over
3,000 square kilometers of French countryside. Yet the Germans’
tactical successes belied Michael’s strategic failure. The British
defenders fell back, but the BEF did not break. Within two weeks,
the deployment of French and British reserves arrested the
German advance. Logistical difficulties also stalled the German
Army’s progress; German troops had advanced to a point over fifty
kilometers from their closest railheads, which limited their access
to crucial supplies, especially artillery ammunition. Moreover,
the crisis compelled the Allies, at long last, to establish a unified
command. On 26 March, the Allies appointed French General
Ferdinand Foch to the position of “generalissimo,” with the official
title of General in Chief of the Allied Armies. Henceforth, he would
coordinate the various Allied armies on the Western Front, guiding
but not directly commanding the Allied military effort.
On 9 April 1918, a new German offensive, Operation GeorGette,
targeted the British in Flanders. The attack gained about sixteen
kilometers but failed to replicate the dramatic advances made
in March. The following month passed in relative quiet until the
opening of Operation Blücher -Yorck on 27 May. Directed primarily
against the French Sixth Army along the Chemin des Dames,
the offensive initially offered the prospect of a decisive German
victory. Taken by surprise and forced into a headlong retreat, the
French gave up about sixty kilometers and 50,000 prisoners before
the front once again stabilized. At the city of Château-Thierry, on
the Marne River, the American 3d Division’s 7th Machine Gun
Battalion helped hold up the German advance on 31 May, denying
them a secure foothold south of the Marne.
When Operation B lücher finally ended on 5 June, it had
produced a nearly 2,300-square-kilometer salient in the Allied front
lines, stretching from Soissons in the west and Château-Thierry
•••• 10 ••••
in the south to the vicinity of Reims in the east. German soldiers
were just over sixty kilometers from Paris—as close as they had
been in September 1914. The French government was in a state
of crisis. French prime minister Georges Clemenceau declared,
in terms that Winston Churchill would echo two decades later,
that “the Germans may take Paris but that would not stop me
from fighting. We will fight on the Loire, then on the Garonne,
if we must, then even on the Pyrenees. If at last we are chased
from the Pyrenees, we will continue the war on the sea; but as to
making peace, never!” As it happened, solidifying Allied resistance
precluded a further German drive on the French capital. In June,
the Germans followed up Blücher with a pair of more modest
operations, code-named Gneisenau and haMMerschlaG, designed to
improve the position of the German armies in the Marne salient.
Neither achieved significant results. (See Map 1.)
As of early July, the record of the German spring offensives was
decidedly mixed. Michael and Blücher had inflicted undeniable
tactical defeats on the Allies, but both fell short of their larger
operational objectives. Indeed, the salients created by the two
offensives left the German Army vulnerable to counterattack. This
was especially true in the Marne salient, which lacked sufficient
north-south lines of communication, creating severe logistical
Château-Thierry, after having changed hands three times in
two months (National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 11 ••••
difficulties for the Germans. In addition to holding a more vulnerable
position overall, the German Army was greatly reduced in numbers.
Even though the Germans generally inflicted heavier casualties than
they suffered in the 1918 offensives, March and April 1918 were their
bloodiest months of the entire war. Unlike the Allies, who could
count on American manpower to make up their losses, the Germans
had no deep well of replacements from which to draw.
Despite these challenges, Ludendorff continued to hold out
hope for a final victory. This would be achieved through an
operation code-named haGen, which would involve an attack on the
British Second Army just south of Ypres. The defeat of GeorGette
in April, however, indicated that the Allies had sufficient reserves
in the north to halt a major offensive. The Germans would have
to draw the British and French reserves away from the north to
a new sector. Ludendorff suggested that an offensive aimed at
capturing Reims, an important rail hub, would both ease German
supply difficulties in the salient and entangle the British and
French reserves in a new campaign. This goal became the genesis
of the last major German offensive of the war, M arneschutz-reiMs
(Marne Defense–Reims).
Planning for this operation began on 5 June, immediately
after the end of the Blücher offensive. The underlying concept
was simple. Rather than attacking Reims directly, German armies
on either side of the city, in Champagne to the east and along the
Marne to the west, would break through to a depth of about thirty
kilometers. The two jaws of the German advance would meet near
Épernay, about twenty-four kilometers south of Reims, enveloping
the city and its defenders. The destruction of substantial forces at
Reims would compel the Allies to deploy their reserves, weakening
their position in the north and clearing the way for haGen,
which OHL tentatively scheduled for 1 August. OHL assigned
M arneschutz-reiMs, set for 15 July, to the Army Group German
Crown Prince, headed by the Kaiser’s eldest son, Crown Prince
Wilhelm. The army group included the German First, Third, and
Seventh Armies, a total of forty-eight divisions organized in eleven
corps, or approximately 650,000 men. Artillery assets amounted
to 6,353 guns, twice as many as were available to the defenders.
General Max von Böhn’s Seventh Army, which would execute an
opposed river crossing over the Marne, received nearly half of
these guns. The attack would take place along a 119-kilometer
front stretching from Château-Thierry in the west almost to the
Argonne Forest in the east.
78
X X
27
X X
30
X X
1
X X
2
X X
28
X X
42
X X
9
X X
41
X X
in Tours
83
X X
in Le Mans
4
X X
3
X X
26
X X
33
X X
80
X X
X X X
III
X X X X X
BEF
X X X X
BEL
AEF
X X X X X
GAC
XXXXX
XXXXX
E
N
G
L
I
S
H
C
H
A
N
N
E
LS
eine R
S e i n e R
S
e
i
n
e
R
O
i
s
e
R
A
i
s
n
e
R
VesleR
O
u
r
c
q
R
M
ar n
e
R
Som
m
e
R
L y sR
Yse r R
M
a
r
n
e
R
Antwerp
Passchendaele
Lille
Arras
Amiens
Abbeville
MontdidierCantigny
Noyon
St.-Quentin
Soissons
Meaux
Château-Thierry
Châlons
Reims
Melun
Troyes
Château
Auxerre
Beauvais
Cambrai
Doullens
Mons
Na
Ypres
Dunkerque
Calais
Fontainebleau
Sens
Évreux
Châteaudun
Rouen
Dieppe
BRUSSELS
PARIS
B E L G I
F R A N C E
U N I T E D
K I N G D O M
Map 1
82
X X
89
X X
0
37
X X
32
X X
35
X X
92
X X
29
X X
77
X X
5
X X
GHQ
X X X X X
GAE
XXXXX
M
a
r
n
e
R
M
e
u
s
e
R
M
e
u
s
e R
M eu
s
e
R
MoselleR
R h i n e R
Neufchâteau
Bar-le-Duc
St.-Mihiel
Seicheprey
Metz
Kaiserslautern
Karlsruhe
Trier
Aachen
Arlon
Sedan
Nancy
Épinal
Belfort
Lunéville
Vesoul
Colmar
Strasbourg
Mulhouse
Verdun
Chaumont
villain
mur
Liège N E T H E R L A N D S
S W I T Z E R L A N D
G E R M A N Y
L U X E M B O U R G
21 March–15 July 1918
W E S T E R N F R O N T
Front Line, 15 July
U.S. Division locations as of 15 July
German Operation MICHAEL, 21 Mar–5 Apr 1918
German Operation GEORGETTE, 9–29 Apr 1918
German Operation BLÜCHER-YORCK, 27 May–5 Jun 1918
German Operations GNEISENAU and HAMMERSCHLAG, 9–15 Jun 1918
X X
0
0 50 Kilometers
Miles50
0 100 150 200 and Above
E L E V A T I O N I N M E T E R S
•••• 14 ••••
Although the German divisions massed for the attack
represented a formidable concentration of force, few were fresh
and none were at anything approaching full strength. Limited
rations—roughly 2,500 calories per day, down from 3,100 calories
earlier in the war—left the German soldiers undernourished and
vulnerable to disease. The first wave of the influenza epidemic in
the summer of 1918 sent as many as 2,000 men per division to the
hospital. Even after receiving replacements before the offensive,
German divisions were severely understrength. In the German 10th
and 36th Divisions of General Hugo von Kathen’s XXIII Reserve
Corps (part of the Seventh Army), companies contained an average
strength of about sixty men. The divisions themselves could muster
only about 5,000 effectives each. In contrast, American infantry
companies consisted of 250 men at full strength, and American
divisions—over twice the size of full-strength French or German
divisions—amounted to no less than 28,000 men.
The Germans would base their attack on the doctrine of
infiltration tactics. A decentralized system of command and control
that relied on the initiative and good sense of noncommissioned
officers and individual infantrymen, infiltration tactics routinely
produced dramatic advances on the battlefield against strong
defensive positions. Most important was the close cooperation of
infantry and artillery. Fired “off the map,” without lengthy registration,
a hurricane artillery bombardment would suppress Allied defensive
positions, allowing specially trained Stosstruppen (storm troops)
to advance. Organized in flexible ten- to twelve-man squads and
equipped with grenades, flamethrowers, and light machine guns,
storm troops would overwhelm lightly defended enemy positions,
bypassing strong points, while advancing as far and as fast as
possible, supported all the while by a Feuerwalze (rolling barrage).
These methods had been key to the tactical successes the Germans
achieved during Michael and Blücher, and it remained to be seen
whether the Allies could develop an effective counter.
Between the end of May and the beginning of July, minor Allied
counteroffensives regained a few square kilometers of the ground
lost earlier in the year. American battlefield successes in support of
these operations were heartening but small. At the end of May, the
1st Division assaulted and successfully held the village of Cantigny
against determined German counterattacks. The 2d Division
likewise captured Belleau Wood and the villages of Bouresches
and Vaux after a grueling struggle that continued through most
of June. In these engagements, the Americans demonstrated their
•••• 15 ••••
ability to advance and hold ground against determined German
resistance while absorbing punishing losses, including nearly
10,000 casualties in the fighting around Belleau Wood alone. And
thousands more Americans reached France every day. After the
battles of Belleau Wood and Cantigny, a German assessment of
the American forces noted that, “considering its small experience
of war and defective training the combat value of the American
division can in general be described as good. In defense even the
most recently arrived troops represent an opponent worthy of
respect. The American soldier shows himself to be brave, strong,
and skillful. Losses are not avoided. However their leadership is not
yet all that good.” This eager—if undertrained and inexperienced—
force would face its first major test in the Second Battle of the
Marne, beginning with the final great German offensive in mid-July.
The repulse of the German G neisenau and haMMerschlaG
offensives in mid-June inaugurated what Foch termed the “period
of waiting.” He and the rest of the Allied command anticipated a
renewed German drive, although no consensus existed at first as
to where it would fall. French intelligence accurately estimated
that the Germans still had substantial reserves, amounting to at
least seventy-five divisions—fifty-five of them fresh—as of 30 June.
Intelligence estimates also correctly predicted that limitations
on transport capacity, as well as the overall state of the German
reserves, precluded any major German offensive on the Western
Front before 15 July. The Allies therefore had ample time to prepare
a counterattack. On 14 June, Foch instructed the commander-
in-chief of the French Army, General Henri Philippe Pétain, to
begin planning for an offensive in the area of the northwestern
shoulder of the Marne salient. Foch and Pétain conceived this
attack explicitly as a riposte to the coming German offensive. The
Allied counterattack would fall immediately after the Germans
committed substantial forces to a new push. Success in this attack
depended to a large extent on timing: the shorter the delay between
the German offensive and the Allied counteroffensive, the better
the chances for an Allied victory. The primary objective was to
bring Allied field artillery and heavy guns within range of the
German-held rail hub at Soissons. As Foch noted, interdiction of
German supply through Soissons would ensure that “any German
offensive in the direction of Château-Thierry [and hence along the
road to Paris] would be deprived of its life blood.”
The Soissons offensive fell to the French Tenth Army, under
the command of General Charles Mangin—an experienced officer
•••• 16 ••••
known throughout the French Army as “le boucher,” or “the
butcher,” for his aggressive tactics. Also assigned to the offensive
were General Jean-Marie Degoutte’s French Sixth Army, which
would attack from the west, and General Antoine de Mitry’s
French Ninth Army, which would advance from the south. General
Mangin completed his plan of operations for the offensive on 20
June, carrying out a minor preparatory attack on 28 June that
advanced the front several kilometers and revealed the German
Army’s lack of defensive preparations. Heartened by this success,
Mangin proposed expanding the offensive to encompass an attack
on Soissons itself. Mangin’s impending operation built on plans
for a more limited offensive against the eastern flank of the Marne
salient by General Henri M. Berthelot’s French Fifth Army, which
had been in development since 7 June. Both operations had relatively
modest objectives but had the potential to achieve strategically
significant results. If the offensive drives by the French Fifth Army
from the east and the Tenth Army from the west met in the middle,
they could attempt to envelop and destroy the German forces left
within the salient. Yet neither side had ever succeeded in a battle
of annihilation on such a scale, even after multiple attempts over
nearly four years of fighting on the Western Front.
The AEF allocated substantial forces to operations around
the Marne salient. Even though General John J. Pershing objected
to American units serving as part of Allied armies, the crisis
provoked by the German 1918 spring offensives led him to release
American divisions for service in French and British commands.
Pershing’s flexibility on this matter paid off on 10 July 1918, when
Foch announced plans to establish an independent U.S. army of
thirteen divisions, scheduled to be created by the end of July. In
the meantime, six American divisions remained in position around
the Marne salient. The blooded American 1st and 2d Divisions
occupied rear areas near Foissy and roughly ten kilometers south
of Château-Thierry respectively. The 26th (Yankee) Division,
composed of National Guard units from the six New England
states, held the 2d Division’s old lines along the edges of Belleau
Wood, operating with the French 167th Division as part of the
American I Army Corps. The 3d Division, part of the French Sixth
Army’s XXXVIII Corps under General Jean de Mondésir, occupied
a position along the Marne just east of Château-Thierry. The
infantry brigades of the 28th (Keystone) Division were stationed
both to the east and west of the 3d Division, with the 55th and 56th
Brigades attached to the French 125th and 39th Divisions. About
•••• 17 ••••
30 kilometers east of Reims, the 42d Division held a second-line
position behind the French 13th and 170th Divisions as part of
General Henri Gouraud’s French Fourth Army.
Defensive preparations in these sectors varied substantially
depending on the commander. In general, all the forces under the
control of the French high command (GQG) were to adhere to the
principles of elastic defense-in-depth, which Pétain had laid out in
his Directive No. 4 in December 1917. This document prescribed
a lightly held front line, with the main “combat zone” located
several kilometers to the rear. Such a deployment kept the bulk
of the defenders out of the range of enemy artillery, preserving
their strength for the main defensive battle. The attackers, who
would be disorganized after having fought through the thinly held
“sacrifice” line of defense manned by isolated groups of soldiers
who were expected to hold out at all costs, would lose momentum
by the time they reached the second defensive line. This approach
to defensive operations was the cutting edge of doctrine in 1918.
The Germans employed these tactics with considerable success
in 1917 during the Nivelle Offensive and the Third Battle of Ypres,
and the Allies considered their example worthy of imitation.
Soldiers from the Rainbow Division advancing (National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 18 ••••
Pétain, however, did not require his subordinates to implement
these instructions to the letter. He permitted them to use their own
judgment regarding the proper forms of deployment within their
defensive sectors. This meant that while General Gouraud’s Fourth
Army embraced the doctrine of defense-in-depth, General Degoutte’s
Sixth Army, holding the defensive line along the Marne, did not.
Degoutte instead directed his men to defend the Marne “with one
foot in the water,” prescribing a rigid, linear defense. The American
commanders serving under Degoutte’s command generally followed
his direction, despite their reservations, but not all of his French
subordinates did the same. The inconsistent defensive preparations
within the Sixth Army caused considerable confusion for the Allies
when the German offensive finally opened on 15 July.
By the middle of July, it was clear that Foch’s “period of
waiting” was at an end. Intelligence pieced together from various
sources gave the Allies a remarkably accurate and detailed
understanding of the scale, objectives, and even the precise timing
of the next German offensive. In spite of the massive concentration
of German pursuit aircraft in the region—no less than forty-six
of the seventy-eight German fighter squadrons on the Western
Front were operating near the Marne as of early July—aerial
reconnaissance nevertheless detected that the Germans were
moving large quantities of munitions into the salient. An informant
attached to the German crown prince’s staff also passed along
useful information about German preparations to his French
handlers. Deserters and prisoners captured during the lead-up to
the attack revealed additional significant details. In one notable
case, a German officer who had swum across the Marne near
Dormans to reconnoiter potential crossing points on 30 June was
captured with several maps in his possession. In response to these
signs, Pétain ordered the transfer of five divisions into the area
east of Château-Thierry between 7 and 9 July. Additional troop
movements into Champagne followed after 12 July. The final and
most important piece of intelligence, however, came mere hours
before the German offensive began. At 2000 on 14 July, a trench raid
by the French IV Corps (part of the Fourth Army) returned with
twenty-seven German prisoners. After a brief interrogation, the
prisoners disclosed that the German offensive would open between
0300 and 0500 the next day, following a preparatory bombardment
scheduled for shortly after midnight. Between 2330 and 2345, only
about thirty minutes before the German preparatory bombardment
was to begin, Allied artillery in Champagne and along the Marne
•••• 19 ••••
opened fire on suspected German assembly areas. These were the
first shots of the Second Battle of the Marne.
OperatiOnS
Defending Champagne
When the German attack began in the early morning hours
of 15 July, the American forces attached to the French Fourth
Army in Champagne were deployed as follows. From west to
east, the 84th and 83d Infantry Brigades of Maj. Gen. Charles T.
Menoher’s 42d Division held second-line positions in the sectors
of the French 13th and 170th Divisions, with both falling under
the overall command of General Stanislas Naulin’s French XXI
Corps. The 42d, composed of National Guard units from twenty-six
states, became known as the “Rainbow Division” because of the
variety of hues in the colors of its component regiments. Although
it was only the fourth American division to reach France, the 42d
had seen limited fighting thus far, and many in the division were
eager to prove that Guardsmen could fight just as well as U.S.
Army regulars. Some twenty-five kilometers to the east of the 42d
Division’s position was Col. William Hayward’s 369th Infantry,
a segregated African American New York National Guard unit
known to its members as “Harlem’s Rattlers,” later termed the
“Harlem Hellfighters” by the Germans. On the morning of 15 July,
the 369th Infantry held a second-line position in support of the
French 16th Division.
In general, the American units in Champagne enjoyed a strong
working relationship with their French comrades. The Fourth
Army’s battle-scarred commander, General Gouraud, was held in
particularly high esteem; Brig. Gen. Douglas MacArthur, the 42d
Division’s chief of staff, later characterized Gouraud as “without
weakness,” describing him as “almost . . . the reincarnation of
that legendary figure of battle and romance, Henry of Navarre.”
The Americans trusted Gouraud and took their place within
the French defense-in-depth for the coming battle. While the
French units held the “sacrificial” trenches, the inexperienced
42d Division held the crucial “intermediate” position, three
kilometers to the rear, where the main battle would be fought.
Writing in his diary on 14 July, one soldier recorded that their
orders were “to fight to the last man, and in no case, to let the
Bosche through [sic].”
•••• 20 ••••
Of the twenty-two German
divisions allocated to the offen-
sive east of Reims, elements
of at least six divisions—all
assigned to General Karl von
Einem’s German Third Army—
attacked within the sector
partly held by the 42d Divi-
sion. Although the preemptive
Allied artillery barrage indi-
cated that the offensive had
lost the element of surprise—an
essential component of earlier
German successes—the attack
could not be called off on such
short notice, and the German
gunners opened their prepara-
tory bombardment on schedule
at 0010 on 15 July. The intensity
of the German fire left a lasting
impression on the men of the
42d Division, who observed
the destruction of the first-line
trenches from the comparative
safety of their positions in the
second line. The sound of the German guns could be heard as
far away as Paris. As the first German infantrymen went forward
at 0350, the small groups of Allied soldiers left in the forward
trenches set off flares, indicating the general direction and strength
of the German assault, before opening fire. The Germans were
surprised to find the forward trenches so lightly held. Instructed
to maintain a rapid pace—some of the German assault formations
had orders to go as far as twenty kilometers in the first day—the
Germans rapidly mopped up the first defensive line and continued
the advance.
Struggling forward across the wide expanse separating the
first and second Allied lines while under heavy artillery fire, the
Germans found the main defensive line intact and fully manned,
and the 42d Division’s machine gun and rifle fire caught them in
the open. Veteran French soldiers advised the Americans to hold
their fire until they could clearly see their targets’ uniforms—in
the early morning haze, it was easy to mistake French horizon
Brig. Gen. Douglas
MacArthur, days after
winning his fourth Silver Star
(National Archives)
•••••••••••••
•••• 21 ••••
blue for German field grey. Desperate to break through the second
line, the German infantry launched seven attacks in close order
against the American defenses, suffering appalling casualties.
One doughboy recorded that the German waves were so tightly
packed that the dead “couldn’t find room to fall down.” Small
teams of storm troops did manage to reach the Allied lines, where
they engaged in fierce hand-to-hand combat with the American
defenders, but these isolated efforts quickly met defeat. The Allies
launched several counterattacks beginning at 1500, and by the end
of the day the 42d Division had recaptured the first-line trenches.
To the east, the 369th Infantry took several casualties,
including five fatalities, in the initial German bombardment, but the
German infantry failed to appear when the barrage lifted around
0430. When it became clear that no attack was forthcoming, the
369th received orders to move almost five kilometers to the west to
support General Georges Lebouc’s French 161st Division. “Harlem’s
Rattlers” arrived in time to aid the 161st Division’s defense, with
one machine gun team—commanded by the 369th’s regimental
machine gun officer, 1st Lt. Lewis E. Shaw—helping to repulse a
German assault while under heavy artillery fire. Shaw received the
Croix de Guerre, as well as a promotion to captain, for his role in
this action. On 18 July, the 369th participated in a counterattack
that drove the Germans back to their original lines.
The experiences of the 42d Division and the 369th Infantry
were indicative of the situation along almost all of the French
Fourth Army’s front. General Gouraud’s elastic defense-in-depth
had held.
“The Rock of the Marne”
The situation was different in the Sixth Army’s sector. There,
the principal American units within the zone of the German
offensive were Maj. Gen. Joseph T. Dickman’s 3d Division and Maj.
Gen. Charles H. Muir’s 28th Division. The 3d Division, attached to
de Mondésir’s XXXVIII Corps, held a twelve-kilometer front along
the Marne River, from the outskirts of Château-Thierry in the west
to the slopes overlooking the Surmelin River valley in the east.
The division’s 4th, 7th, 30th, and 38th Infantry regiments were all
in line from west to east. Just to the right of the 3d Division was
General Antoine Diebold’s 125th Division—part of General Léonce
Lebrun’s III Corps—with the 28th Division’s 55th Infantry Brigade
attached. While the majority of the brigade held a six-kilometer
•••• 22 ••••
front in the 125th Division’s second line, about three-and-a-half
kilometers to the rear, four companies from the 109th and 110th
Infantry regiments held forward positions along the southern
bank of the Marne.
Defensive arrangements varied from unit to unit. General
de Mondésir interpreted his commander’s intent to defend the
Marne “with one foot in the water” literally. He instructed General
Dickman to prepare a rigid frontline defense, rather than a defense-
in-depth, explaining that “it is on the Marne itself that it is easiest
for us to halt the enemy because he can cross it only by small
fractions in boats, or by columns on the foot bridges, and because
he approaches or reaches the [sic] River, necessarily disorganized.”
Dickman objected, later writing that he found these instructions
to be “a violation of fundamental principles and utterly erroneous.”
He gave his subordinates the freedom to prepare their defenses
as they saw fit.
The wooded, rolling slopes and overgrown fields on the
southern banks of the Marne were ideal defensive terrain, offering
the Americans both concealment and cover. Along the entire 3d
Division front, the forward portion of the “outpost zone,” on the
river banks, consisted of widely spaced rifle pits and machine
gun nests. Behind this was the main line of the “outpost zone,”
with entrenchments along railroad tracks running parallel to the
Marne. The second defensive position, based around an aqueduct
built along the slopes overlooking the river, was more elaborate;
it included shallow trenches as well as dugouts used as command
posts or dressing stations. The third defensive position, known as
the “woods line,” bisected the Bois d’Aigremont to the south. This
would be the last line of resistance.
Col. Edmund L. Butts, commanding the 30th Infantry,
distributed his battalions among the widely spaced first-, second-,
and third-line positions—effectively preparing a defense-in-depth.
However, Col. Ulysses G. McAlexander ordered his 38th Infantry to
reinforce the front line, positioning four companies—about 1,000
men—in the “outpost zone” to prevent the Germans from crossing
the river. The remainder of the regiment divided between two
lines located roughly 2,700 and 5,400 meters from the Marne. The
9th Machine Gun Battalion, together with the 6th Engineers, held
positions along the 3d Division’s front in support of the infantry.
McAlexander—suspecting both that the French to his right would
retreat, and that the Germans would attempt to use the cover of the
Surmelin valley to infiltrate his sector—also took the precaution
•••• 23 ••••
of constructing additional trenches throughout the 38th Infantry’s
position, facing east.
The Americans serving with the 125th Division found the
defensive preparations in their sector to be even more confused.
Distributed by platoons, Companies L and M, 109th Infantry,
and Companies B and C, 110th Infantry, held partially complete
trenches along the railroad and near the northern edges of the Bois
de Condé, a few hundred meters at most from the Marne. Despite
receiving no orders to fall back in the event of a German attack,
one soldier in the 28th Division observed that the French officers
had burned their maps and records and packed up their personal
belongings, a clear sign that they planned to withdraw. Without
other orders, however, the four American companies stationed
along the river intended to stand and fight.
On the opposite side of the Marne, General von Kathen’s
XXIII Reserve Corps—the westernmost formation in the Seventh
Army—made its final preparations for the offensive. The units
assigned to the attack, while understrength, were among the best
in the German Army, and morale was generally high. The 10th
Division, rated by Allied intelligence as a “first-class” unit, stood
on the far left flank of the entire M arneschutz -reiMs offensive;
its 398th Infantry and 6th Grenadier regiments had orders to
Entrance to a dugout near Suippes, Champagne
(National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 24 ••••
cross the Marne and advance through the area held by Butts’
30th Infantry. Immediately to the east was the 36th Division,
considered an “excellent fighting unit” in 1917 but recently assessed
as “second class.” This division’s 5th Grenadier and 128th Infantry
regiments were to attack along the front held by the French 125th
Division and Colonel McAlexander’s 38th Infantry. The role of the
XXIII Reserve Corps in the offensive was to advance about seven
kilometers on a six-kilometer front, with the first day’s advance
limited to just two kilometers. Once in position, its orders were to
dig in and await the fall of Reims. Whether the corps would make
any further attacks would be determined later.
When the Allied artillery bombardment began at 2340 on 14
July, the leading elements of the 10th and 36th Divisions were
already in their assembly areas, about 500 meters north of the
Marne. Before the shells began to burst, some Germans speculated
that their artillery preparation had started ahead of schedule.
The initial Allied bombardment caught one battalion of the 398th
Infantry Regiment in the open, causing over half its strength to
disperse before the crossing could begin. Other units were more
fortunate—the 6th Grenadier Regiment managed to avoid the
barrage entirely—but doubts nevertheless spread through the
German lines. The Allies knew that an attack was coming, but
just as in Champagne it was impossible to call off an offensive
at the last moment. At ten minutes after midnight, the German
gunners duly opened fire. Yet the confusion caused by the Allied
bombardment forced the German engineers, who had made
painstaking preparations for the river crossing, to improvise. They
relocated ferries and bridging materials, and directed the assault
troops to new assembly areas. At 0210 on 15 July, the first German
infantrymen set foot on the south bank of the Marne.
The preemptive Allied bombardment disrupted the Germans
from the start. The lead battalions of the 10th and 36th Divisions
were supposed to reach a line of departure south of the Marne
by 0350. At that time, the German preparatory bombardment
would shift to a rolling barrage that would accompany the main
infantry attack. As it happened, few formations reached their
jump-off points in time. Even so, the 6th Grenadier Regiment
continued to enjoy relatively good fortune, crossing the Marne
by 0240 and seizing most of the town of Mézy. To the east, the
175th Infantry Regiment likewise crossed the river on schedule,
reaching its starting line between Varennes and Reuilly in good
order well before 0350. Other units faced much greater opposition.
•••• 25 ••••
One battalion of the 5th Grenadiers, having suffered heavy
casualties in the Allied bombardment, failed to cross the river
altogether. Its replacement, the regimental reserve, succeeded
in bringing only scattered elements to the southern bank of the
Marne by daybreak. The 3d Battalion, 5th Grenadiers, crossed
on schedule but encountered an American trench shortly after
disembarking, whereupon soldiers from the 38th Infantry engaged
the attackers in hand-to-hand combat. On the far west of the
German advance, the 398th Infantry Regiment crossed on ferries
and bridges, arriving on the southern bank of the Marne well
before 0350. Unable to establish contact with the neighboring 6th
Grenadiers, and having lost contact with its own 1st Battalion,
the regiment paused to regroup before continuing the advance.
The German artillerymen, having heard nothing from the infantry
south of the Marne, assumed that the advance was proceeding on
schedule. However, as the rolling barrage began at 0350, only one
out of four German regiments in the first wave, the 175th, was
prepared to attack.
The advance of the 175th met with initial success. By dawn, the
American companies along the river bank in the 125th Division’s
sector had endured nearly four hours of German artillery fire
while in the dubious shelter of their unfinished entrenchments.
One veteran of the 28th Division recorded that the intensity of
the bombardment “in more than one instance upset completely
the mental poise of our soldiers, so that they had to be restrained
forcibly by their comrades from rushing out into the open in their
temporary madness.” Throughout the barrage, the American and
French defenders kept up a steady fire on the Germans, who
crossed the river in twenty-man boats. When the main German
infantry advance began, however, the French fell back at once,
leaving the Americans to face the Germans in isolated, platoon-
sized groups. Outnumbered and attacked on all sides, the four
28th Division companies fought desperately throughout the early
morning. Around 0800, the remnants of these units attempted
to fight their way to the safety of the 55th Brigade’s lines, about
three-and-a-half kilometers to the south. Small groups made
their way back during the afternoon and evening of 15 July, but
the majority became prisoners or casualties. Company C, 110th
Infantry, suffered severe casualties, with twenty-four men killed,
forty-eight wounded, and sixty-five taken prisoner. The other
companies took similarly heavy losses, and casualties from the
entire detachment amounted to several hundred men. By 0900,
•••• 26 ••••
elements of the 175th Infantry Regiment had advanced at least
three kilometers, bypassing or destroying the Americans and
reaching the southern edge of the Bois de Condé, within sight
of the Allied second defensive line. (See Map 2.)
The 5th Grenadier Regiment, crossing just east of the
Surmelin ravine, achieved similarly impressive results early on.
By 0400, elements of the 5th Grenadiers had infiltrated behind
the 38th Infantry’s forward positions on the Marne riverbank,
occupying the hillside east of Moulins. Some German forces made
it even farther, reaching the woods northeast of Paroy—almost
two kilometers south of the Marne—where they engaged in a
firefight with parts of two companies of the 38th Infantry. Several
American commanders staged local counterattacks as the threat
to the 38th Infantry’s right flank became apparent. Occupying
eastern-facing trenches on the outskirts of Moulins, Capt. Thomas
C. Reid’s Company F, 2d Battalion, 38th Infantry, opened fire on
the Germans streaming southward past Varennes. Two of Reid’s
platoons, commanded by Lt. Ralph Eberlin and, after Eberlin
was wounded, by Lt. Carl C. Cramer, launched a bayonet charge,
disrupting German efforts to set up machine gun nests overlooking
the 38th Infantry’s main position. A larger counterattack came at
0900, as the 1st Battalion’s Companies B and D, under the overall
command of Maj. Harry J. Keely, assaulted the 175th Infantry
Regiment’s position on Moulin Ruiné Signal, northeast of Paroy.
Hitting the advancing German forces in their right flank, the
attacking companies inflicted heavy casualties and captured
around 400 prisoners. Afterward, the companies set up a new
defensive line on the Moulins ridge, temporarily securing the 38th
Infantry’s right flank.
The situation on the 38th Infantry’s left was less critical, but
also worrisome. After crossing the Marne, the 398th Infantry
Regiment paused briefly, losing the rolling barrage, before pressing
toward the railroad line, overrunning forward positions held by the
30th Infantry. At 0500, the regiment launched simultaneous attacks
toward the south and southeast. The southern thrust encountered
heavy resistance; after destroying a machine gun nest manned by
the 7th Infantry southwest of Le Ru Chailly Farm, and capturing
about twenty-five prisoners, the attack foundered. The regiment
had advanced only about 100 meters to the south by 0900, as
Companies I and F, 3d Battalion, 7th Infantry, stubbornly defended
the northern edge of Fossoy and the nearby woods. Refusing
to withdraw, two platoons from these companies fought to the
•••• 27 ••••
last man, inflicting heavy casualties before being destroyed. The
398th’s push to the southeast fared somewhat better despite fierce
opposition from the 30th Infantry, with several patrols penetrating
the “aqueduct line” and infiltrating into the woods east of Fossoy
and north of Crézancy. Exhausted and understrength, the 398th
ceased all offensive operations in its sector by 0900, shifting to
the defensive to await reinforcements.
After several crossing attempts early in the morning, the
German 47th Infantry Regiment secured a foothold opposite
Mont-Saint-Père around 0845, advancing to the east and west to
make contact with neighboring units. In response to this new
German advance, one hundred men from the 30th Infantry—still
holding their posts near the river bank—fought their way back to
Allied lines under the command of 1st Lt. James H. Gay, surprising
several German detachments and capturing around 150 prisoners,
including a German major, along the way. Gay later received the
Distinguished Service Cross for his leadership during this action.
Pressing on toward Mézy, the 47th Infantry Regiment became
bogged down under fire from American positions in and around
the southern outskirts of the town. The Germans made several
attempts to break through during the afternoon before halting
around 1630. With this single exception, the 10th Division had
shifted over to the defensive by noon, having secured few of its
first-day objectives.
Meanwhile, other German crossings in the vicinity of Mézy
had been uniformly unsuccessful. Although the 6th Grenadiers
crossed the river on either side of Mézy, capturing most of the
town before dawn, it was unable to hold on to this position
against determined American opposition. Companies G and H, 2d
Battalion, 38th Infantry, counterattacked the German landing site
east of Mézy at 0415, driving the Germans in this area back across
the river by 0500. The Germans held on somewhat longer west of
the town, advancing up to and beyond the railroad line shortly
after 0500. One German company of about forty men pushed even
farther, infiltrating beyond the American defenders and reaching
Crézancy, over two kilometers south of the Marne. The remainder
of the regiment was pinned down near the railroad tracks only a
short distance from the river bank, exposed to machine gun fire
from the 3d Division’s 9th Machine Gun Battalion, sections of which
occupied concealed positions along the railroad embankment.
Capt. Jesse W. Wooldridge’s Company G, 38th Infantry, which
remained in the vicinity of Mézy throughout the morning, staged
398
I I I
47
I I I
6 Gren
I I I 5 Gren
I I I
X X
10
X X X
XXIII Res
38
I I I
30
I I I
4
I I I
7
I I I
X X
3
X X X
XXXVIII Fr
X X X X
SIXTH Fr
XX
IIIIII
III
III
III
III
C
B
B
F A
G
H
E
F
I
D
D
1 5 J U L ( A . M . )
1
5
J
U
L
(
A
.
M
. )
1
7
–
1
8
J
U
L
17–1 8 J U L
1
5
J
U
L
(
A
.
M. )
1
6
J
U
L
1
5
J
U
L
1 6 - 1 7 J U L
W
O
O
D S L I N E
A Q
U
E
D
U
C
T
L
I
N
E
R
A
I
L
R
O
A
D
L
I
N
E
18 J
U
L
Bois d’Aigremont
M
a
r
n
e
R
S u
to Château-Thierry
Mo
Le Ru Chailly
Farm
VarennChartèves
Mont-St.-Père
Mézy
Gland
Blesmes
Crézancy
Moulins
Paroy
Fossoy
Map 2
128
I I I
175
I I I
X X
36
X X
23
X X X
VIII Res
X X
Fr 125
X X
Fr 51
X X X
III Fr
XXX
XXX
XXX
XX
Co C
110thCo B
110th
Co L
109th
Co M
109th
Co A, 109th
Co B, 109th
Co C, 109th
Co K, 109th
Co D, 109th
Co H, 109th
1 5 J U L ( A . M.)
RAILROA D L I N E
15 JU L
1 6 – 1 8 J U L
Bois de Condé
M
O
U
L
I
N S
R I D G E
M
a
r
n
e
R
M
a
r
n
e R
r m e l i n C r
oulin Ruiné
Signal
Les Étangs
Farm
Jaulgonne
Rosay
es
Courcelles
Sauvigny
Soilly
Chassins
Tréloup
Condé–en–Brie
Reuilly
Monthurel
St.-Agnan
D E F E N D I N G T H E M A R N E
3D DIVISION ZONE
55TH BRIGADE, 28TH DIVISION, ZONE
15–18 July 1918
0 100 150 200 and Above
E L E V A T I O N I N M E T E R S
Front Line, Date
German Axis of Advance
American Company Location
0
0 21 Kilometers
Miles21
•••• 30 ••••
a series of counterattacks beginning at 1030 against this German
lodgment. These assaults—directed against a force roughly five
times the size of Wooldridge’s company—captured several hundred
German prisoners, effectively destroyed the 6th Grenadiers as a
fighting force, and earned Wooldridge the Distinguished Service
Cross. Wooldridge’s unit suffered 50 percent casualties.
Because of German advances throughout the morning, the
38th Infantry now found itself in an exposed position, with
enemy forces active to the front and on both flanks. The situation
was particularly critical shortly before 1100, when Maj. Fred L.
Walker—believing that his platoons along the river bank had
been destroyed—ordered the 1st Battalion, 30th Infantry, to
retreat back to the Bois d’Aigremont, leaving the “aqueduct line”
unmanned in the 30th Infantry’s sector. Walker’s withdrawal
created a gap in the American defenses on the 38th Infantry’s left
flank. During the late morning and early afternoon, however, a
series of American counterattacks helped to stabilize the front
line and eliminate the risk of a breakthrough. At 1100, American
forces near Mézy and Fossoy assaulted the 398th Infantry
Regiment, forcing it to give up its modest gains and withdraw
Aerial view of the 3d Division’s sector on the Marne
(National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 31 ••••
back to the railroad line. Around noon, two companies of the 4th
Infantry attacked the small German detachment in Crézancy,
which at that time was the farthest German penetration within
the 3d Division’s sector. After holding out for an hour, the
Germans withdrew a short distance to the north, leaving the
southern part of Crézancy in American hands. The German force
remained near that position until the evening, when it retreated
in good order back to the Marne. Later in the afternoon, the
1st Battalion, 7th Infantry, together with elements of the 30th
Infantry, launched an additional counterattack to retake the 7th
Infantry’s original outpost line along the Marne. Moving across
ground already targeted by German artillery, the attackers came
under an intense and accurate bombardment while exiting the
Bois d’Aigremont, suffering heavy casualties. The counterattack
faltered and dispersed. Patrols later discovered that the Germans
had abandoned their positions in this area.
Fighting east of the Surmelin continued into the afternoon,
with German efforts achieving mixed results. Despite having made
excellent progress early on, the 36th Division paused to regroup in
front of the Allied second-line positions around 0930, exchanging
fire with elements of the 28th Division’s 55th Brigade, located
near St. Agnan. The Germans later resumed the offensive during
the afternoon, assaulting the 38th Infantry’s positions east of the
Surmelin ravine. In response to this renewed threat to his right
flank, Colonel McAlexander ordered the 1st and 2d Battalions, 38th
Infantry, accompanied by the 30th Infantry detachment remaining
in Mézy, to fall back toward the “aqueduct line,” thereby reducing
the regiment’s overextended front line. The battalions took up
new positions facing to the north and east. At 1245, General de
Mondésir took additional steps to shore up the XXXVIII Corps’
position, ordering the French 73d Division to advance into the
gap that had opened between the American and French units east
of the Surmelin. The attack opened at 1930, and resulted in the
capture of Les Étangs Farm, a little under two kilometers east
of the Surmelin. The Germans made no further attacks in this
area on 15 July. In the evening, General von Kathen ordered the
elements of the XXIII Reserve Corps south of the Marne to make
preparations to withdraw.
To a large extent, the confused fighting on 15 July had been
a company and platoon commander’s battle, with officers at the
regimental level and above exercising little control after the
shooting started. Soldiers on the spot carried out the local attacks
•••• 32 ••••
that contained the German advance on their own initiative. More
organized efforts undertaken on the basis of inaccurate or out-of-
date information, such as the 7th Infantry’s ill-fated counterattack
during the afternoon, were much less successful. General Dickman,
commanding the 3d Division, received almost no information from
the front line, and therefore had few opportunities to shape the
course of the battle. In his memoirs, Dickman affirmed that “after
relaying the information of the coming attack and ordering the
fire of counter preparation, the conduct of the fighting passed into
the hands of the subordinate commanders, each one to employ
the means at his disposal, including artillery and reserves, in
accordance with his judgment and the developments of combat.”
By contrast, the lack of communication between the front line
and support units, particularly the artillery batteries, hindered
the Germans. Having lost the rolling barrage shortly before 0400,
the German infantry lacked effective fire support throughout the
battle, and consequently they had only limited ability to advance
against determined opposition.
On the morning of 16 July, the Germans still held a small
lodgment on the south bank of the Marne within the 3d Division’s
sector. The German armies north of the Marne had achieved more
impressive results. Against General Berthelot’s French Fifth Army,
the Germans had driven forward over five kilometers, nearly
destroying the Italian II Army Corps. The advance across the
Marne within the 125th Division’s sector was also notable, and
elements of six German divisions were now on the river’s southern
bank, occupying a depth of up to six kilometers along a fourteen-
kilometer front. Despite these gains, the German Seventh Army
had failed to secure the offensive’s ambitious first-day objectives,
and Reims remained securely in Allied hands. It was unclear
whether further efforts could salvage the offensive.
Having pinned such high hopes on the operation’s success, the
German high command ordered the Seventh Army to continue
its drive on 16 July. These attacks made limited progress north of
the Marne. Meanwhile, von Kathen’s XXIII Reserve Corps near
Château-Thierry carried out its planned withdrawal. American
patrols quickly discovered that the Germans in the 3d Division’s
sector had left, and by 1000 General Dickman could report, with
some exaggeration, that “on the front of the 3d Division there are
no Germans south of the Marne, except the dead.” In the 125th
Division’s sector, the Germans repulsed a joint Franco-American
counterattack involving elements of the 28th Division’s 109th
•••• 33 ••••
Infantry. A minor attack on the French 73d Division, launched
in the morning of 17 July, represented the last German offensive
effort south of the Marne. After this operation, which briefly
routed two companies of the 28th Division, the French and
Americans returned to the offensive, forcing the Germans back
across the Marne by the end of the day. By that time, the German
high command had already decided to terminate M arneschutz-
reiMs. Ludendorff immediately approved a new plan for Army
Group German Crown Prince to continue limited attacks north
of the Marne toward the city of Reims, transferring the Seventh
Army’s reinforced artillery to the east to support this operation.
Ludendorff’s attention, however, was already focused on the
long-awaited campaign against the British in Flanders. On the
afternoon of 17 July, he departed from the Marne salient, heading
to the headquarters of Army Group Rupprecht of Bavaria to
plan that next offensive. Yet as Ludendorff continued to fantasize
about future victories, Crown Prince Wilhelm formed a more
realistic assessment of the battle’s consequences, later writing
in his memoirs that when the attack on Reims failed “I no longer
entertained any doubt that matters at the front as well as affairs at
home were drifting towards the final catastrophe—a catastrophe
which was inevitable unless, at this eleventh hour, great decisions
were formed and energetically carried out.”
Although the battle was decided on the ground, aerial
operations also played an important role in the Allied victory.
The Germans committed more than half of all their pursuit
squadrons on the Western Front to the offensive. Among these
was the famous “Flying Circus” of the Red Baron, Capt. Manfred
von Richthofen—though as the Red Baron himself had been killed
earlier in the year, from 8 July the unit was under the command
of 1st Lt. Hermann Goering. Opposing this German force was
a range of Allied squadrons, including two inexperienced and
underequipped units belonging to the AEF’s Air Service, the 1st
Pursuit Group and the I Corps Observation Group, both part of
Col. William L. “Billy” Mitchell’s 1st Air Brigade. On 29 June the 1st
Pursuit Group deployed to Touquin, about forty kilometers from
Château-Thierry. A few days later, a group of eight Nieuports from
the 27th Aero Squadron under Lt. Donald Hudson encountered nine
German Fokker D-7s. Thirty-five minutes later, both squadrons
returned to their respective bases with two fewer machines. Other
skirmishes in the first weeks of July were similarly bloody. Among
the pilots of the 1st Pursuit Squadron who lost their lives in the
•••• 34 ••••
fighting over the Marne salient was 1st Lt. Quentin Roosevelt, the
youngest son of former president Theodore Roosevelt. Quentin
Roosevelt earned his first aerial victory in a dogfight on 10 July.
He died four days later, on the eve of the German offensive, when
he became separated from his squadron near Chamery and was
overwhelmed by seven German fighters.
While the 1st Pursuit Group contested German air superiority,
the I Corps Observation Group conducted a series of reconnais-
sance flights over the German front lines and rear areas, taking
relatively light casualties in the course of their missions. Their
photographs helped to reveal German troop movements and
supply dumps, adding to the evidence pointing to the impending
German offensive. When the German attack began, both the I
Corps Observation Group and the 1st Pursuit Group went into
action, flying constant missions throughout 15 July. Colonel
Mitchell personally identified several German pontoon bridges
near Dormans in a solo reconnaissance flight during the morning.
Although American fighters engaged in dogfights during the rest of
Constructing a memorial to 1st Lt. Quentin Roosevelt
(National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 35 ••••
the day, they suffered no casualties and earned no confirmed kills.
American aircraft flew numerous missions during the following
days, and the 1st Pursuit Group claimed to have destroyed a total
of eight German aircraft between 15 and 18 July.
Casualties during the fighting on the ground were much more
severe. From 15 through 17 July, the 3d Division lost a total of
3,151 men (606 dead), with the heaviest losses falling on the 7th
Infantry (730 casualties) and the 38th Infantry (632 casualties).
Although only one of the 28th Division’s two infantry brigades—the
55th—was heavily engaged, it also suffered severely, with the 109th
and 110th Infantry regiments losing a total of 670 men (including
223 dead) between 15 and 18 July. German casualties are more
difficult to estimate, although it is clear that the 10th and 36th
Divisions both lost heavily, with prisoners taken from these units
alone amounting to well over 1,000 men. One German veteran
estimated that 60 percent of the men who attacked against the
Americans on the Marne had become casualties.
The 3d Division’s success on the Marne earned it justified
fame. Whereas other Allied divisions along the Marne yielded up
to eight kilometers in some places to the advancing Germans, the
Americans—and, in particular, McAlexander’s 38th Infantry—held
their ground. In his final report on the AEF, Pershing wrote that
during the fighting near Château-Thierry on 15 July:
a single regiment of the 3d Division wrote one of the most brilliant
pages in our military annals. It prevented the [German] crossing
at certain points on its front, while on either flank the Germans
who had gained a footing pressed forward. Our men, firing in
three directions, met the German attacks with counterattacks at
critical points and succeeded in throwing two German divisions
into complete confusion, capturing 600 prisoners.
Pershing later clarified that the regiment in question was the
38th Infantry. In a letter written shortly after the battle, the 3d
Division’s then–chief of staff, Col. Robert H. C. Kelton, discussed
McAlexander’s leadership on 15 July in glowing terms, describing the
38th Infantry’s commanding officer as “like the rock of the Surmelin
Valley as George H. Thomas was of Chickamauga.” The sobriquet,
originally applied just to McAlexander, was altered slightly and
eventually extended to encompass the 38th Infantry as a whole:
“The Rock of the Marne.” The 3d Division likewise became known
as the “Marne Division.”
•••• 36 ••••
The Battle of Soissons
The defeat of the German offensives in Champagne and on the
Marne presented the perfect opportunity for Foch’s long-awaited
counteroffensive. The German forces in the Marne salient were
disorganized, depleted, and exhausted after nearly four months of
continuous fighting. On top of this, they were disheartened by the
obvious failure of their most recent major offensive. Moreover, the
German concentration in the eastern part of the salient left only
a handful of the salient’s forty divisions—under the command of
General Johannes von Eben’s Ninth Army—to guard against an
Allied attack in the west. Although German planners recognized
that this deployment left their right flank vulnerable, they assumed
that any Allied reserves allocated to an offensive against the
western side of the Marne salient would be drawn into the fight
around Reims. In other words, they believed that their own
offensive would remove any threat to their position in the Marne
salient. On this point, they nearly were proven correct. At 1000
on 15 July, shortly after the opening of M arneschutz-reiMs, Pétain
issued orders for General Émile Fayolle’s Reserve Army Group to
cease preparations for the offensive near Soissons and to transfer
reserves to the east for a counterattack against the Germans on
the Marne. If carried out, these orders would have indefinitely
postponed the offensive assigned to Mangin’s Tenth Army, giving
the Germans in the salient an opportunity to redeploy their forces
and to reinforce the defenses on their right flank. Foch moved
quickly to countermand Pétain’s orders, instructing Fayolle’s army
group to continue preparations for the attack and limiting the
transfer of reserves away from the Tenth Army. Instead, reserves
were released from Gouraud’s Fourth Army, which had checked
the German assault in Champagne. Arrangements for the attack
near Soissons therefore proceeded according to schedule, with
the offensive opening as planned on 18 July. (See Map 3.)
Mangin’s Tenth Army consisted of twenty-two infantry and
three cavalry divisions, most of which had been concentrated
in and around the forest of Villers-Cotterêts since late June.
Although not present with the main body of the army, the
American 1st and 2d Divisions were slated to play a leading role
in the coming offensive. Maj. Gen. Charles P. Summerall’s 1st
Division was located near Froissy, a little over twenty kilometers
from the battlefield at Cantigny, when it received orders on 11
July to report to the French Tenth Army. The division made
•••• 37 ••••
the 120-kilometer journey to Mortefontaine by truck over the
following week, with the artillery arriving just in time for the
offensive during the night of 17–18 July. The 2d Division had even
less time to redeploy, receiving orders to move out on 14 July.
Lacking transportation, the infantry could not embark until 16
July, and consequently did not reach their destination until the
evening of 17 July. Arriving at Taillefontaine with little time to
spare—still about seven kilometers from the jump-off point—
many units had to march in double-time up to two kilometers
before immediately going into action.
On top of the chaos caused by its last-minute redeployment,
the 2d Division had just undergone a change in overall command.
While on leave in Paris on 14 July, Maj. Gen. James G. Harbord,
who had led the 4th Brigade through the fighting in Belleau Wood,
received orders to take command of the 2d Division after Pershing
relieved Maj. Gen. Omar Bundy. Harbord left Paris the next day,
assuming command of the division around 0900 on 15 July. He had
almost no time to familiarize himself with his new duties before
the beginning of the offensive, which he only learned about on
the evening of 15 July. Harbord recorded his irritation at these
last-minute developments, writing that:
A division of twenty-eight thousand men, the size of a European
army corps, had been completely removed from the control of
its responsible commander, and deflected by marching and by
truck, through France to destination unknown to any of the
authorities responsible either for its supply, its safety, or its
efficiency in the coming attack. The French Corps Commander
and his staff were unable to state the points at which the division
would be debussed or where orders could reach which would
move it promptly to its attack position. This within thirty hours
of a decisive battle.
Opposite the Tenth Army were eight divisions, backed by
an additional six in reserve, belonging to the German Ninth
Army’s XXXIX Reserve Corps and XIII Corps. These units had
made limited defensive preparations and suffered from low
morale as well as supply shortages. The Germans based their
strongest points of resistance around the ravines that cut across
the countryside southwest of Soissons. Other strong points
were the small French villages, whose stone-walled buildings
provided useful shelter and cover for the German defenders. In
X X X
XXXIX Res
X X X
XIII
X X X
XXV Res
X X X
VIII
X X X
XXIII Res
X X X X
NINTH
X X
2
X X
4
X X
26 X X
3
X X
1
X X X
XVIII Fr
X X X
XX Fr
X X X
XXX Fr
X X X
XI Fr
X X X
I Fr
X X X
II Fr
X X X
VII Fr
X X X
XXXVIII Fr
X X X
I
X X X X
SIXTH Fr
X X X X
NINTH Fr
X X X X
TENTH Fr
SE VENTH
NINTH
NINTH
SIX TH
SIX TH
TENTH
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
Mar n e
R
O u r
c
q
R
O u r c q R
O
u
r
c
q
R
Ve
s
l
e
R
A
i
s
n
e
R
A i sne
R
Vierzy
Jaulgonne
Fère–en–Tardenois
Condé
CHÂTEAU-THIERRY
SOISSONS
Map 3
X X X
VI Res
X X X
LXV Gkdo
X X X
XV Res
X X X
VIII Res
X X X
IV Res
X X X X
SEVENTH
X X X X
FIRST
X X X
FrI
X X X
III Fr
X X X
V Fr
X X X
XIV Fr
X X X
II It
X X X
I Col
X X X
XXII Br
X X X X
FIFTH Fr
SE VENTH
FIRST
NINTH
FIFTH
XXXX
XXXX
M
a
r
n
e
R
M
a
r
n
e
R
A r d r e R
Vesle R
A
i
s
n
e
R
Tunnel
–en–Brie
Fismes
REIMS
ÉPERNAY
M A R N E S A L I E N T
ORDER OF BAT TLE
18 July 1918
0
0 51 Kilometers
Miles51 2 3 4
2 3 4
0 100 150 200 250 and Above
E L E V A T I O N I N M E T E R S
Planned Axis of Attack
Front Line, 18 Jul, Morning
•••• 40 ••••
general, the Germans in the Marne salient, not expecting to fight
a defensive battle, had not constructed elaborate trench networks
resembling those found in more established positions elsewhere
on the Western Front.
Both the 1st and 2d Divisions came under the control of the
French XX Corps, commanded by General Pierre E. Berdoulat.
Known within the French Army as the “Iron Corps,” the XX
Corps had fought in Champagne and at Verdun before deploying
to Soissons. Foch himself had led the corps during the defense of
Nancy in 1914. At Soissons, Berdoulat’s command consisted largely
of Americans, who accounted for no less than 80 percent of the
corps’ strength. The 1st and 2d Divisions were among the most
experienced and battle-tested units in the AEF. The 2d Division,
however, was not entirely fresh as a result of the casualties it
sustained in the fierce fighting in Belleau Wood, which had ended
only a few weeks prior.
Also assigned to the XX Corps was one of the French Army’s
most elite units—and one of its few remaining twelve-battalion
divisions—the 1st Moroccan Division, commanded by General
Albert Daugan. Consisting of a mix of French Foreign Legion,
Senegalese, and North African units, the outfit impressed the
Americans as particularly fearsome. One doughboy recalled that
a “big, fierce-looking” French battalion commander, visiting with
1st Division troops before the battle, commented that “he hoped
it would be sunny on the morrow, as it was much better weather
Battery of 5th Field Artillery, 1st Division, near Ploisy
(National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 41 ••••
for killing Germans, and that he was looking forward to it.” The
American added that the officer “looked as if he meant it, too.”
The three divisions in XX Corps formed the spearhead of the
Allied attack, aimed at securing high ground south of Soissons.
Other American units were also slated to participate in subsidiary
operations around the Marne salient. Farther to the south, elements
of the 4th Division were assigned to divisions in the French Sixth
Army’s VII and II Corps. The 39th, 58th, and 59th Infantry of the 4th
Division were thus attached to the French 164th and 33d Divisions
in two separate attacks directed eastward into the salient, both of
which would begin on 18 July. From the southernmost tip of the
salient, the 3d, 26th, 28th, and 42d Divisions were to push northeast,
crossing the Marne and proceeding north through the center of
the salient, with attacks beginning at the same time as—or shortly
after—the initial operation near Soissons. Although the offensive
against the Marne salient was technically a French operation under
French overall command, it was really a coalition effort, with
substantial AEF and BEF contributions. (See Map 4.)
Assigned to fight alongside the infantrymen of the French
Tenth Army was a contingent of 324 tanks belonging to Col.
Charles-Joseph Chedeville’s French 2d Tank Brigade. Consisting
of either heavy tanks—the 13.6-ton Schneider CA-1 or the 23-ton
Saint-Chamond, both mounting 75-mm. guns—or light 6.7-ton
Renault FT tanks, mounting 7.9-mm. or 37-mm. guns, the battalions
of the brigade supported different divisions in the attack. A total
of fifty-seven tanks, mainly Saint-Chamonds, went into battle
in support of the 2d Division, while twenty-seven Schneiders
accompanied the 1st Division. Owing to technical problems—
common to tank operations throughout the First World War—only
225 tanks of the 2d Tank Brigade made it to the battlefield on 18
July, although others joined the fight on subsequent days. The
Sixth Army had another 154 tanks. The total of 478 made Soissons
the French Army’s largest tank battle of the war. One American
soldier remarked that there were more tanks at Soissons “than we
knew were in the world.”
The XX Corps issued attack orders on 17 July, with H–Hour set
for 0435 the next day. Unfortunately, these orders did not reach the
1st and 2d Divisions until late in the evening. Both divisions had
difficulties moving into assault positions and to the starting line,
compounded by violent thunderstorms during the night of 17–18
July. The road conditions were so bad that machine gun companies
and 37-mm. gun sections could not keep up and did not rejoin their
•••• 42 ••••
regiments until 19 July. Many of the accompanying French tanks
also arrived late to the fight.
In the 1st Division’s sector, the Allies experienced a security
breach—similar to that suffered by the Germans before their
offensive in Champagne—when two French deserters crossed
over to enemy lines around 0400 on 18 July, revealing that the
Allied attack would begin in less than an hour. The Germans
responded with a protective artillery barrage at 0430, which fell
while the 1st Division’s first wave was assembled on the starting
line. The Allied artillery plan called for a rolling barrage, beginning
at H–Hour without any prior artillery preparation. The absence of
a sustained preparatory bombardment had the intended effect of
preserving the element of surprise, in spite of the above-mentioned
security breach, and the rolling barrage—together with French
tank support—enabled a rapid advance across two kilometers of
open farmland with only light casualties. The fighting intensified
around the town of Missy-aux-Bois and the nearby Missy ravine,
a kilometer-wide gulch where the Germans had stationed large
numbers of machine guns and field artillery pieces. Maj. Clarence
R. Huebner’s 2d Battalion, 28th Infantry, took 50 percent casualties
in two unsuccessful attacks on the ravine. The German position
faced an additional attack by the 2d Battalion, 26th Infantry, which
stormed the ravine at about 0715. Fighting through the elaborate
German defensive works, the 28th Infantry, supported by elements
of the French 153d Division, mopped up the German strongpoint
by 0900, as the town of Missy-aux-Bois fell to the 16th Infantry
at about the same time. One German battalion, which had taken
refuge in a cave, was captured almost intact, complete with 604
officers and enlisted men.
As the regiments of the 2d Infantry Brigade to the north
became bogged down in the fighting around the Missy ravine,
the 1st Brigade’s 16th and 18th Infantry made one of the day’s
most dramatic advances, reaching their objectives by 0830 and
pushing forward about a kilometer farther than neighboring
units. Elements of the 18th Infantry went even farther than that,
assaulting Chaudun—located within the 1st Moroccan Division’s
sector—and engaging in hand-to-hand combat with the German
defenders. The 1st Brigade’s rapid advance left both its regiments
in an exposed position, and they suffered heavy casualties as a
result. The official history of the 1st Division records that the 2d
Battalion, 16th Infantry, taking fire from three sides, lost all of its
officers and “was almost annihilated.”
X X
Fr 38
X X
2
X X
1
X X
Fr 1 Moroccan
X X
Fr 153
X X X
XXX Fr
X X X
XX Fr
X X X
I Fr
X X X X
TENTH Fr
1
8
J
U
L
(
A
.
M
.
)
1
8
J
U
L
(
A
.
M.)
1
8
J
U
L
1
8
J
U
L
19
2 0 JUL
2
0
J
U
L
2
0
J
U
L
1 9
J
U
L
2 1 - 2 2 J U L
2 1 - 2 2 JUL
1
8
–
1
9
J U L
21-22
JU
L
2
0
J
U
L
1 9 J U L
19JUL
XX
XXX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XXX
XX
A
i
s
n
e R
A
i
s
n
e
R
t o C h â t e a u - T h
i
e
r r y
M
i
s
s
y
R
a
v
i
n
e
C
h
a
z
e l l e R a v i ne
Cravançon Farm
Beaurepaire Farm
Berzy–
le–Sec
Vierzy
Billy-sur-Ourcq
Corcy
Villers-
Hélon
Dommiers
Cûtry
Missy-
aux-Bois
Chaudun
Ploisy
Vauxcastille
Buzancy
Villermontoire
Tigny
Parcy-Tigny
SOISSONS
A T T A C K A T S O I S S O N S
MARNE SALIENT
18–22 July 1918
0
0 31
Miles41 2 3
2 4 Kilometers
0 100 150 200 and Above
E L E V A T I O N I N M E T E R S
Front Line, Date
American Sector
Map 4
•••• 44 ••••
At 1100, the XX Corps headquarters announced that the 1st
Division’s intermediate objective, Cravançon Farm, had been
taken. Although the division’s orders were to take the line running
from Buzancy to Berzy-le-Sec, the disorganization and heavy
casualties incurred in the morning’s fighting limited its ability
to make a further advance. German resistance also started to
stiffen in the afternoon, owing in part to the timely arrival of the
28th Division, which had been in reserve. Unable to progress
toward its new objective, the 1st Division shifted over to the
defensive, staging no major attacks in the afternoon of 18 July.
The division had made a six-kilometer advance in the space of
only a few hours—shattering the 11th Bavarian Division, which
was left with only 2,500 men out of a prebattle total of 6,500. In
the words of the 16th Infantry’s regimental chaplain, “it was a
most spectacular battle to watch, but terrible beyond description
to experience.”
To the south, the doughboys in the 2d Division began their
assault as they arrived at their jump-off points around 0435 on
18 July. In this sector, the objectives were Beaurepaire Farm,
the château southeast of Vauxcastille, and the eastern edge of
the village of Vierzy. Advancing behind a rolling barrage, the
infantry made rapid progress at first, although confusion set in
immediately as troops became intermingled—in part because of
their precipitate arrival at the starting line. Although the terrain
in the 2d Division sector did not include the troublesome ravines
that obstructed the 1st Division’s advance—with the exception
of the Vauxcastille ravine near Vierzy—many 2d Division units
rapidly strayed outside their boundaries or veered away from
the designated axis of attack. Some 2d Division troops crossed
into the 1st Moroccan Division’s sector, fighting alongside
French troops in that area. One company of the 2d Battalion,
5th Regiment (U.S. Marines), went even farther astray, traveling
over five-and-a-half kilometers to the northeast—across the
front of the 1st Moroccan Division—almost reaching the zone
of operations of the 1st Division. Around 0930, a mixed force
composed of elements of the 5th Marine Regiment and the 28th
Infantry infiltrated to the east as far as the edge of the third
objective, the town of Vierzy. After briefly entering the town,
however, the detachment withdrew to avoid the effects of German
gas shelling.
Although the 2d Division’s third-line objectives remained
unoccupied on 18 July, it nevertheless had successfully taken all
•••• 45 ••••
of its second objectives by the early afternoon. In response to
the division’s rapid progress during the morning, the XX Corps
announced a new objective for 2d Division, beyond the Château-
Thierry–Soissons highway. The regimental commanders did not
receive orders for this operation in time for the division to begin
the assault at 1800, and the attack was therefore postponed. The
2d Division’s assault kicked off shortly after 1900. The division
reached a line east of Vierzy, which fell to elements of the 23d
Infantry and 5th Regiment—attacking from three directions—
after 2000. By the evening of 18–19 July, the 2d Division’s front
line was fairly straight except on its left flank, where the 1st
Moroccan Division’s comparatively slow rate of advance had left
a one-kilometer gap. The 2d Division repulsed several German
counterattacks during the night.
The Allied advance of roughly seven kilometers on a twenty-
kilometer front in a single day of fighting dislocated the entire
German position in the Marne salient and wrecked Ludendorff’s
hopes for a renewed offensive in Flanders. The German high
command redeployed divisions earmarked for that offensive
during the afternoon on 18 July, diverting troops and support
services to the south, and effectively ending preparations for
haGen. One German officer wrote in his diary the next day: “I
know that we are finished. My thoughts oppress me. How are we
to recover ourselves?” German losses had indeed been severe.
Across the entire front of the Marne salient, around 20,000 German
soldiers had been taken prisoner, including 10,000 captured by
the Tenth Army. Although the Allied forces had fallen somewhat
short of their ambitious objectives for the first day, failing to break
through the German lines, by the evening of 18 July it was clear
that the German Army had suffered a major defeat.
At 0400 on 19 July, the 1st Division resumed attacking with
the same objective, the line Buzancy–Berzy-le-Sec. This attack
began with a rolling barrage and tank support, but no preparatory
artillery fire. Heavy German artillery and machine gun fire stopped
elements of both the 1st Division and the 1st Moroccan Division
short of the Chazelle and Ploisy ravines, stalling the advance.
Resuming the assault once again at 1730, this time with heavy
artillery preparation, 1st Division elements captured Ploisy,
advancing to the east of the town and into the Chazelle ravine.
In the 2d Division’s sector, Harbord ordered Lt. Col. Harry Lee’s
6th Regiment (U.S. Marines) to continue the attack on 19 July. The
division’s other three regiments were too exhausted and depleted
•••• 46 ••••
to make further attacks. When the 6th Regiment’s assault began
at 0900, accompanying French tanks drew a tremendous volume
of German artillery fire, resulting in about a third of the armored
force being disabled. By midday, the 2d Division had advanced to
a line from Parcy-Tigny to La Râperie. Losses during the advance
were extremely heavy, and at 1145 Colonel Lee estimated that
his regiment had already suffered roughly 30 percent casualties.
At 1800, the German 20th Division counterattacked on the 2d
Division’s left flank, seeking to regain ground lost during the day.
The 1st Moroccan Division and 6th Regiment repulsed the attack
west of Villemontoire. The French 58th Division ultimately relieved
the 2d Division during the evening of 19–20 July, completely taking
over the 2d Division’s front by the next afternoon. After this, the
2d Division withdrew to Pierrefonds and Taillefontaine, in Tenth
Army reserve, having advanced some eight kilometers in only two
days of fighting.
The attack of the 6th Regiment on 19 July had been especially
costly. The unit suffered the highest number of casualties of any
unit in 2d Division engaged in the offensive, in large part because
“Peace Talk”: American artillery piece near Dommiers
(National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 47 ••••
of accurate German artillery fire, which caught the 6th Regiment
during their two-kilometer advance across open ground to the
starting line. The division sustained 4,135 casualties between 18
and 20 July, including over 700 dead. Harbord was convinced that
their push had made an extremely important contribution to the
Allied victory in spite of its heavy cost, writing in his memoirs
that the 2d Division’s achievements at Soissons would have
been worthwhile “even if every member of the Division from the
Commanding General to the last joined replacement had died.”
As the 2d Division withdrew from the line, the 1st Division
remained in place with orders to continue the advance the
next day. The XX Corps adjusted divisional boundaries at 0230
on 20 July, setting La Folie Farm, east of Buzancy, as the 1st
Division’s new objective. Beginning at 1400, after two hours
of artillery preparation, attacks made some progress before
stalling in front of Berzy-le-Sec. The XX Corps ordered a renewed
attack on 21 July, but by this time 1st Division units were badly
commingled and organization was largely improvised. When the
28th Infantry’s senior surviving officer in the vicinity of Berzy-
le-Sec, 1st Lt. Soren C. Sorenson, was hit by a shell fragment,
2d Lt. John R. D. Cleland assumed command of the first wave
of the assault on the town. Despite being wounded both before
and during the advance, Cleland led his men into Berzy-le-Sec
through German artillery and machine gun fire, receiving the
Distinguished Service Cross for this action. The 28th Infantry
had control of the town by 1015. Throughout the day, the entire
1st Division faced heavy artillery and machine gun fire, as well
as at least one fully organized German counterattack, which it
repulsed. By the evening of 21 July, the division had secured a
firm position on the outskirts of Buzancy, astride the Soissons–
Château-Thierry highway.
The XX Corps ordered the British Army’s 15th (Scottish)
Division to relieve the 1st Division on the night of 22–23 July,
and the 1st Division’s infantry regiments withdrew from the line
with little German interference the next day. In only five days
of combat, the 1st Division had forced an advance of eleven
kilometers, sustaining a total of 6,870 casualties, including
over 1,500 dead. Losses among commissioned officers were
particularly heavy, amounting to as much as 60 percent killed or
wounded. The 16th and 18th Infantry regiments lost all of their
field-grade officers, except their respective colonels; for their
part, the 28th Infantry lost two and the 26th Infantry all of its
•••• 48 ••••
field-grade officers. The division would not be fit for service on
an active front again until September.
On 22 July, in response to the Allied advance, Ludendorff
authorized the evacuation of German forces from the southern
portion of the Marne salient. Further withdrawals took place by
stages over the following weeks. Field Marshal Hindenburg later
wrote that the retreat from the Marne was:
a grievous decision, not from the purely military standpoint but
from that of professional pride. How the enemy would rejoice
if the word “Marne” were to mean a revolution in the military
situation for a second time! Paris, and indeed all France, would
breathe again. What would be the effect of this news on the whole
world? We realised how many eyes and hearts would follow us
with envy, hatred—and hope.
The Germans in the salient would ultimately pull back to a
defensive line on the Vesle River, over thirty-two kilometers north
of Château-Thierry.
The performance of the 1st and 2d Divisions at Soissons
offered further proof that American troops were willing and
able to fight fiercely at close quarters with the enemy. It also
again demonstrated that reckless frontal assaults and headlong
advances were costly and often ineffective. At the same time,
American troops benefited from fighting alongside the veteran
1st Moroccan Division, which—like many other French Army
units—had refined small unit tactics to such an extent that
they could reliably reduce heavily defended strongpoints while
suffering minimal casualties. The only drawback to the French
tactical system was that it entailed a slower rate of advance,
something that many American officers were unwilling to accept
or even understand. Additionally, both American divisions had
difficulty maintaining direction and observing unit boundaries
while attacking, although this might have been attributable in part
to their late receipt of orders and late arrival on the battlefield,
which gave them no time to reconnoiter or even study maps
of this unfamiliar front. The divisions also found maintaining
forward and lateral communications in the attack to be a constant
challenge, and command posts at all levels consistently failed to
keep each other informed of their locations as they moved. In the
1st Division, the 2d Brigade’s commander, Brig. Gen. Beaumont
B. Buck, exacerbated this confusion by deciding to spend his time
•••• 49 ••••
throughout much of the offensive “touring” the battlefield and
visiting neighboring units rather than commanding his own men.
General Summerall had assumed command of the 1st
Division only three days before the attack, replacing Maj. Gen.
Robert L. Bullard, who had been promoted to command the III
Corps. An artilleryman who had commanded the 1st Division’s
field artillery brigade at Cantigny, Summerall cemented his
reputation as a “pusher” almost immediately. He may have
threatened to relieve Buck, spurring the latter into action on 21
July, and impugned the personal courage of the 26th Infantry’s
commanding officer, Col. Hamilton A. Smith, by suggesting that
his command post was located too far to the rear. Smith was
killed shortly afterward while leading his men in an assault on
a German machine gun position. Summerall later also relieved
the 28th Infantry’s commander, Col. Conrad S. Babcock. Beyond
his tendency to replace subordinates on a whim, Summerall’s
fondness for overblown rhetoric added to his image as an
aggressive, demanding commander. His reply, when asked in the
evening of 18 July whether his division could attack the next day,
was characteristic: “Sir, when the 1st Division has only two men
left they will be echeloned in depth and attacking toward Berlin.”
Summerall’s bombastic personality, however, belied a judicious
appreciation for the power of artillery on the modern battlefield.
Horses of the 7th Field Artillery near Missy-aux-Bois
(National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 50 ••••
Since his arrival in France, he had insisted that American
divisions needed more artillery than that contained in two
regiments of 75-mm. guns and a single regiment of 155-mm.
howitzers, but his recommendations had fallen on deaf ears. At
Soissons, however, he discovered a method for maximizing the
artillery firepower available to the division by concentrating fire
on a narrow front, even if this might leave the division’s flanks
unsupported. This technique proved to be effective.
The 4th Division’s Advance
In the south, other American divisions participated in the
general Allied offensive as part of the French Sixth Army. The
objectives there were more limited, intended mainly to support
the Tenth Army’s decisive effort near Soissons. The French II
Corps, the northernmost unit in General Degoutte’s Sixth Army,
had orders to advance roughly five kilometers to the line running
from a hill north of Breuil to the village of Neuilly-Saint-Front
alongside the Tenth Army. At the same time, the French VII Corps
and the American I Army Corps would make a modest advance
in the southern part of the Sixth Army’s sector. Elements of Maj.
Gen. George H. Cameron’s 4th Division, which had only arrived in
France in May 1918, were assigned piecemeal to French units in
the Sixth Army. Opposing the 4th Division were the German 40th
Division and 10th Bavarian Division, which Allied intelligence
rated as third- and second-class units, respectively (Map 5).
Commanded by Col. Frank C. Bolles, a veteran of the Philippine
Insurrection and recipient of the Distinguished Service Cross
in 1899, the 4th Division’s 39th Infantry attacked along with the
French II Corps’ 33d Division between 18 and 20 July. Despite
suffering from a breakdown in communications which led to the
regiment taking friendly fire from French artillery on the morning
on 19 July, the 39th Infantry managed to advance more than seven
kilometers in two days of fighting, reaching a point two kilometers
east of Chouy while suffering only 255 casualties. Meanwhile, the
4th Division’s 58th and 59th Infantry of the 8th Infantry Brigade
saw action farther to the south while attached to General Léon M.
Gaucher’s French 164th Division, part of the VII Corps. While the
59th Infantry remained in reserve, the 58th Infantry jumped off at
0435 on 18 July with no artillery preparation. Early in the morning,
the 1st and 2d Battalions, 58th Infantry, assisted French units in
successful attacks on Chevillon and Courchamps. Maj. Gilbert R.
39
I I I
48
X
X X
Fr 2
X X
Fr 47
X X
Fr 41
X X
Fr 33
X X
Fr 164
X X X
VII Fr
X X X
XI Fr
X X X
II Fr
X X X X
TENTH Fr
X X X X
SIXTH Fr
1
8
J
U
L ( A . M . )
18
J
U
L
(
A
.
M
.)
1
8
J
U
L
1 8 J U L
1
9
J U L
19
J
U
L
2
0
JU L
2
0
J
UL
XXXX
II
II
II
II
II
II
II
II
II
II
II
II
III
III
Bois de l’Orme
Hill 172
O
u
r c q R
Ourcq
R
Courchamps
Monthiers
Bonnesvalyn
Sommelans
Latilly
Priez
Chézy-en-Orxois
Dammard
Neuilly-St.-Front
Rozet-St.-Abin
Chouy
Faverolles
Corcy
Noroy-sur-Ourcq
St. Remy
Chevillon
St.-Gengoulph
Brumetz
4 T H D I V I S I O N A D V A N C E
MARNE SALIENT
18–20 June 1918
0
0 31 Kilometers
Miles31 2
2
0 100 150 200 and Above
E L E V A T I O N I N M E T E R S
Front Line, Date
American Sector
Map 5
•••• 52 ••••
Cook’s 2d Battalion then made an independent advance around
1000, storming trenches located on Hill 172 and coming under heavy
fire from well-defended German positions near the Bois de l’Orme.
Unable to advance, and having taken almost 50 percent casualties,
the battalion was forced to fall back from the wood, with the bulk of
the unit taking up positions near Hill 172. The French released the
59th Infantry from reserve in the early afternoon, although neither
American regiment made further attacks on 18 July.
Resuming the offensive at 0435 the next day, the 59th
Infantry took heavy casualties in repeated attempts to cross the
Courchamps–Priez road. Despite being supported by French tanks
in attacks during the afternoon, the regiment made no progress
against German artillery and machine gun fire. The 1st Battalion,
58th Infantry, also attacked on 19 July, accompanying a battalion
of the French 113d Infantry Regiment in an advance eastward
from Courchamps. The battalion progressed less than a kilometer
before being halted by heavy German fire. The attack continued at
0435 on 20 July. The 3d Battalion, 59th Infantry, was the only 4th
Division unit to attack on this day, as other American battalions
acted in support of French units. On the early morning of 21 July,
the 164th Division ordered the withdrawal of all 8th Brigade
battalions. The 8th Brigade sustained some 1,660 casualties during
its three days in the offensive, helping French units to gain about
eight kilometers of ground against determined German resistance.
Total casualties for the 4th Division in the offensive against the
Marne salient amounted to 2,098 men.
The Advance from the South
The 26th Division was the third American division to arrive
in France. By the end of the war, it had accumulated more days in
active engagement with the enemy than any other AEF unit, with the
exception of the 1st Division. In addition to its lengthy service in the
line, the 26th Division was distinguished by the controversies that
surrounded both the unit and its commander during and after the
war. Last in his class at West Point, Maj. Gen. Clarence R. Edwards
served as an administrator in the Philippines and headed the War
Department’s Northeastern Department before taking command of
the 26th Division in 1917. His easygoing personality and paternalistic
command style left an indelible mark on the Yankee Division’s
personnel, who idolized their commander, giving him the nickname
“Daddy.” The 26th received less training than other early-arriving
•••• 53 ••••
divisions and performed indifferently during its first tour of duty in
a quiet sector of the line. Inspectors frequently criticized the unit,
citing instances of loose discipline and disorganization.
But the 26th was not necessarily a substandard division. To
some extent, General Pershing’s bias against the National Guard,
something that he shared with many other Regular Army officers,
influenced assessments of the division’s performance. When the
26th Division repelled a major German raid while holding the
line at Seicheprey on 21–22 April, the response from AEF General
Headquarters (GHQ) was overwhelmingly negative. Pershing
considered the raid a defeat, noting that the division had suffered
650 casualties, of which 180 were taken prisoner, and he held the
Yankee Division and its commander responsible.
The reality, however, was more complicated. The commander
of the French XXXII Corps, General Fénelon F. G. Passaga, held
that the division had done well against a “carefully planned and
well executed” German attack. In the assessment of historian
Mark E. Grotelueschen, the division’s record showed that it had
“done fairly well in a long, hard, inglorious tour in an increasingly
active sector.” However far from perfect, the 26th Division was not
as dysfunctional as Pershing and GHQ believed.
In early July, after recovering from the raid at Seicheprey,
the 26th Division moved toward Château-Thierry, occupying a
ten-kilometer front in the Pas Fini (or “unfinished”) sector as
part of Lt. Gen. Hunter Liggett’s newly established I Army Corps,
part of the French Sixth Army. In the German offensive of 15–18
July, the entire line of the 26th was subjected to heavy artillery
bombardment, and its 101st Infantry repelled two minor German
attacks around Vaux on 15 July. Little further enemy action
occurred in the division’s sector, but the incomplete defensive
works offered minimal shelter against German artillery fire and
raids, and the 26th Division suffered more than 1,000 casualties
between 10 and 17 July.
Following the defeat of the German offensive, Liggett directed
the 26th Division to attack in support of the general Allied
operation on 18 July, ordering the Yankee Division to advance two
kilometers while maintaining close contact with the neighboring
French 167th Division (Map 6). As was the case elsewhere along
the Marne salient on 18 July, the assault was scheduled to begin at
0435 without a preparatory bombardment. Confusion set in almost
immediately, as entire companies and ammunition columns lost
their way while advancing through Belleau Wood in the predawn
X X
26
X X
Fr 167
X X
Fr 39
X X X
I
X X X X
SIXTH Fr
1 8 J U L ( A . M . )
1
9
J
U
L
1
8
J
U
L
2
0
J
UL
2
0
J
U
L
2
1
J
U
L
2
2
J
U
L
23
J
U
L
XX
XXX
II
II
II
II
II
II
II
Bois de
Belleau
Bois des
Rochets
Hill 204
Hill 193
M
a
r
n
e
R
ClignonR
to Paris
to Soissons
Torcy
Belleau
Givry Étrépilly
Bouresches
Lucy-le-Bocage
Le Thiolet
Domptin
Bonneil
Vaux
Bussiares
Courchamps
Monthiers
Épaux-Bézu Bézu
Grisolles
Bonnesvalyn
Sommelars
Latilly
Priez
CHÂTEAU-THIERRY
D R I V E T O T H E O U R C Q
MARNE SALIENT
18–26 July 1918
0 100 150 200 and Above
E L E V A T I O N I N M E T E R S
Front Line, Date
American Sector
0
0 1
Miles31 2
2 3 Kilometers
Map 6
2856
X
X X
42
X X
3
X X
Fr 75
X X X
III Fr
X X X
XXXVIII Fr
X X X X
25–26 Jul
FIFTH Fr
X X X X
18–25 Jul
NINTH Fr
18JUL(A.M.)
1 8 J U L ( A . M . )
2 3
J
U
L
2
3
J
U
L
2
1
J
U
L
2
2
J
U
L
2
2 J
U
L
24JU L
24
J
UL
2
4
J
U
L
2
52 5
J U L
26 J U L
2 0 – 2 1 J U L
2 2 – 2 3 J UL
2
5
–
2
6
J
U
L
2 5
–
2 6
J
U L
2
4
–
2
5
J U L
XXX
XX
XXX
XXXX
XX
XX
XXXX
Forêt de
Fère
Bois de Trugny
Forêt de
Fère
La Ventelette
M
ar
n
e
R
S
u
rm e l i n
C r
La Tieulerie Farm
Le Chanois La Théoderie
Croix Rouge Farm
Le Charmel
Château
Jaulgonne
Le Charmel
Fresnes Courmont
Rosay
Varennes
Sauvigny
Condé–en–Brie
Chartèves
Mont-St.-Père
Mézy
Gland
Blesmes
Chierry
Crézancy
Moulins
Paroy
Reuilly
Fossoy
Monthurel
-St.-Germain
Brécy
Beuvardes
Épieds
Trugny
•••• 56 ••••
hours. Only one of the division’s three assault battalions—the
3d Battalion, 103d Infantry—reached its jump-off point in time
to catch the rolling barrage, and yet that battalion, advancing
alongside the French division to its left, took its assigned objectives,
including the town of Torcy, within the hour. The remaining two
battalions reached their jump-off points and attacked around three
hours later. Having captured the town of Belleau by 0830, the 3d
Battalion, 104th Infantry, resumed its advance in the afternoon,
pushing through Givry and partway up the slope of Hill 193. The
battalion then withdrew to positions on the northern edges of Givry
and Belleau. Meanwhile, the 2d Battalion, 103d Infantry, made
a limited advance during the morning, overrunning a German
machine gun position located in the Bouresches railway station
by 0930. Remaining in its new position throughout the day—taking
enfilading fire from machine gun positions on Hill 193—the
battalion repulsed a German counterattack before withdrawing
back to Belleau Wood after dark.
The following two days saw relatively little progress. Despite
orders to continue the attack, the 26th Division held its position on
19 July and waited for the 167th Division to capture Hill 193. The
French division made several attempts to take the hill, supported
by small-arms fire from nearby 26th Division units, but it did not
succeed. By 20 July, the Germans had begun to withdraw from
their forward positions in the salient. Liggett ordered the I Corps
to resume its advance with a major attack in the afternoon on 20
July, instructing the 26th Division to push about five kilometers
to the north and east. After a short preparatory bombardment,
the assault began at 1500 under the cover of a rolling barrage.
Although elements of the 26th Division succeeded in reaching
their first objectives, about two kilometers from their starting
line, the division’s performance was generally poor. The failure
of the neighboring French 39th and 167th Divisions to advance
exposed the Yankee Division’s flanks as it moved forward.
The German forces on Hill 193 remained a particularly serious
obstacle, as the machine gun positions located there enfiladed the
advancing 51st Brigade. The 52d Brigade, on the right, likewise
took fire from German positions on Hill 204, which the French
39th Division assaulted unsuccessfully on 20 July. Machine gun
fire from German strongpoints in Les Petits Bois and the Bois
de Rochets, in the center and on the right of the 26th Division’s
sector respectively, further reduced the Yankee Division’s rate of
advance. In the evening, the 167th Division reported that it was no
•••• 57 ••••
longer in contact with German forces, a sign that the Germans had
evacuated their defensive positions in the I Corps’ sector. Liggett
accordingly ordered the 26th Division to continue attacking on 21
July, hoping to turn the orderly German retreat into a rout.
As the 26th Division struggled to move forward between 18
and 20 July, the French XXXVIII Corps, east of Château-Thierry,
mopped up the remaining German troops south of the Marne. The
3d Division undertook limited operations on 18–19 July, patrolling
actively without attempting a major advance. On the morning
of 20 July, French troops attacking east of the Surmelin ravine
discovered that the Germans in that area had withdrawn. The 38th
Infantry then advanced in conjunction with the French 73d Division,
reoccupying the town of Varennes, which the Germans had captured
on 15 July. On 21 July, the 3d Division established a foothold on the
northern bank of the Marne, crossing on pontoon bridges and boats
near Chierry and Fossoy. German machine gun and artillery fire
prevented an additional crossing by the 6th Engineers near Mézy.
By the end of the day, elements of the 4th and 7th Infantry regiments
occupied positions north of the Marne. Meanwhile, the French 39th
Division captured Château-Thierry itself around 0800 on 21 July, as
part of a general ten-kilometer advance.
Operations in the 3d Division’s sector continued the next day as
the Germans withdrew farther into the salient. The 38th Infantry
Camouflaged pontoon bridge over the Marne (National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 58 ••••
began crossing near Mézy at 0400 on 22 July, occupying Jaulgonne
before noon and driving north toward Le Charmel. Although the
1st Battalion, 38th Infantry, reached Le Charmel at about 1315,
it was unable to hold the position without support and fell back
toward Jaulgonne later in the afternoon. The 4th and 7th Infantry
regiments also advanced against light opposition, and by the end
of the day the 3d Division had secured a line running roughly from
Le Chanois and La Théoderie in the west to Jaulgonne in the east.
The 26th Division’s advances on 21–22 July were equally
dramatic. Attacking at 0400 on 21 July, the Yankee Division drove
forward six kilometers against minimal opposition, reaching the
Soissons–Château-Thierry highway by noon and taking about
175 prisoners. After a brief rest, the advance resumed in the
afternoon. Progress slowed as the infantry approached fortified
German positions near the towns of Épieds and Trugny. Ordered to
continue advancing against what the I Corps headquarters believed
to be lightly defended rearguard positions, General Edwards
launched a series of unsuccessful attacks without artillery support
on Trugny and Épieds in the evening of 21 July. Elements of the 26th
Division briefly entered both towns before stiff German resistance
forced them to withdraw. Fighting continued on 22 July as the 26th
Division made repeated attempts to push through the German
defensive line. The 102d Infantry gained a foothold in Épieds by
0630, but German machine gun fire, as well as a counterattack by
the German 201st Division, caused the regiment to fall back and
prevented further advances during the morning. In the afternoon,
the 102d staged an additional, unsuccessful attack on Épieds after
a preparatory bombardment.
German resistance throughout the fighting on 21–22 July, with
the exception of the defense of Épieds, Trugny, and Le Charmel,
was generally on a small scale. The German rearguard elements
consisted of scattered squad-sized groups of riflemen and machine
gunners. These men had orders to hold out as long as possible in
order to ensure that the bulk of the German forces could withdraw to
new defensive positions. One historian of the 3d Division described
(with slight exaggeration) how hidden German machine gunners
ambushed the advancing American forces, “[opening] fire from
bushes, from concealed slit trenches, and from positions in trees.
It was Indian warfare with modern weapons.” Lt. Col. Emerson G.
Taylor, who served as the 26th Division’s last chief of staff during
the war, praised the tenacity of these “little groups,” which helped
to hold up the Allied advance, writing that “all of them defended
•••• 59 ••••
their positions to the last.” Even small teams fighting in this way
could cause heavy casualties. The rearguard’s efforts bought time
for the Germans to reinforce and occupy a series of defensive lines
that ran across the interior of the Marne salient. Each line was
intended to impede the Allied advance to the Vesle River, where
the German high command hoped the front would stabilize. The
main point of resistance, short of the Vesle, was the line along the
Ourcq River in the vicinity of Fère-en-Tardenois. Although the Ourcq
itself was a small waterway, fordable in many places—one soldier
in the 42d Division wrote that it was “a stream hardly worthy of the
name creek, but dignified by the French as a river”—the wooded
terrain in the Tardenois region, as well as the high ground north
of the river, made the Ourcq an ideal position from which to fight
a holding action.
As the I Corps slogged through one German defensive line
after another, the 1st Air Brigade carried out numerous supporting
missions. The I Corps Observation Group shifted to the north
immediately following the defeat of the German offensive on
the Marne, and a series of reconnaissance flights supported the
Directing the fire of a 37-mm. gun near Roncheres
(National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 60 ••••
advance of the 1st and 2d Divisions near Soissons. The observation
group then returned to the I Corps’ sector as the Americans began
to advance to the Ourcq. Aerial observation during the push saw
mixed results. Pilots had great difficulty communicating with
ground troops who had little or no experience cooperating with
air support. Because infantry contact patrols frequently failed to
indicate their positions with flares or panel displays, observers
had to fly at extremely low altitudes in an attempt to distinguish
between American and German uniforms with the naked eye.
Enemy opposition remained stubborn, and the Air Service took
increasingly heavy casualties as the offensive dragged on. The 1st
Air Brigade lost a total of fifteen pilots during the fighting from 18
July to 6 August, while achieving sixteen confirmed kills.
Meanwhile, the Germans prepared to hold their ground for one
final day before falling back to their next defensive line, near the
Ourcq. The 3d Division’s 4th and 7th Infantry regiments launched
renewed assaults on 23 July, pushing northeast as far as La Tieulerie
Farm. The 26th Division also attacked that morning, and elements
of the 101st Infantry reached the Épieds–Le Chanois road before
withdrawing in the face of heavy German resistance. The rest of the
day was relatively quiet within the 26th Division’s sector. During the
night of 23–24 July, the 28th Division’s 56th Brigade entered the line,
relieving the exhausted 52d Brigade—which, Liggett maintained,
had “[lost] direction and failed to hold together as an organization”
after the events of 21–22 July. At 0405 on 24 July, the 56th Brigade—
now attached to the 26th Division—attacked the German positions
near Épieds and the Bois de Trugny. The attacking 111th and 112th
Infantry regiments found that the Germans had withdrawn during
the night, and both regiments immediately advanced, encountering
almost no opposition before reaching the Forêt de Fère—nearly
nine kilometers away—in the afternoon.
Liggett issued orders in the evening instructing the 26th
Division to make a “supreme effort” to reach the Sergy plateau
before daybreak. This entailed a further ten-kilometer advance.
Passing these orders on to the 26th Division, General Edwards
noted that this drive, if successful, would permit the French
I Cavalry Corps “to pass through and effectively break up a
retreating and hard-pressed enemy. A complete victory is at
hand.” German defenses in the Forêt de Fère, including a heavily
fortified position built around Croix Rouge Farm—a complex of
stone buildings within a large clearing—forestalled this new push.
Rather than attacking such formidable defenses, the 26th Division
•••• 61 ••••
and its attached troops dug in to await relief by the 42d Division’s
84th Brigade, which was then advancing by truck from La Ferté-
sous-Jouarre, roughly thirty-five kilometers to the southwest. The
84th Brigade entered the line on 25 July, taking control of the 26th
Division’s sector by 1900, while the 83d Brigade simultaneously
took over the sector previously held by the French 167th Division’s
170th Infantry Regiment. The 42d Division now held the entire
I Corps front. The Yankee Division accordingly passed into the
Sixth Army’s reserve, ending its participation in the Second Battle
of the Marne.
In the ten days that had elapsed since the beginning of the
German Marne offensive, the 26th Division suffered 4,644 casualties.
Casualties from 18 to 23 July, including losses incurred by attached
units, amounted to 3,613. These losses came in the course of an
eighteen-kilometer advance, which netted about 250 prisoners as
well as several field artillery pieces. Although frequently critical of
Edwards’s leadership, Liggett held the 26th Division’s personnel in
high regard, stating that the “quality of the men was splendid, and
equal to any in the Army.” Although the division’s inexperience and
curtailed training limited its effectiveness in the Marne campaign,
Liggett held that the Yankee Division “nevertheless . . . as a whole
performed very well in its first essay in open warfare, and it did so
under peculiarly difficult conditions.”
The German withdrawal on the night of 23–24 July also opened
up a path for the 3d Division to advance. The next day, leading
elements of the 4th, 7th, and 30th Infantry regiments (the latter
having relieved the 38th Infantry) approached the outskirts of
Le Charmel, but failed to capture the village itself. The division
attacked again on 25 July, and elements of the 4th Infantry finally
succeeded in occupying the village that afternoon. The position
there remained dangerous, as fire from a German machine gun
nest located in Le Charmel Château, a little over a half-kilometer
from Le Charmel proper, prevented American troops from moving
openly in the village streets. By the evening, the capture of
Le Charmel, as well as the entry of the 42d Division into the line,
had prepared the ground for further advances by the I Corps and
French XXXVIII Corps on 26 July.
Croix Rouge Farm
The 42d Division received orders for the first attack it would
make in support of Foch’s Marne counteroffensive at 1540 on
2855
X
28–31 Jul
X X
42
X X
26–27 Jul
Fr 167
X X
26–28 Jul
Fr 39
X X
30 Jul–1 Aug
32
X X
26–30 Jul
3
X X X
XXXVIII Fr
X X X
III Fr
X X X
I
X X X
II Fr
X X X X
SIXTH Fr
X X X X
FIFTH Fr
2
6
J
U
L
2
6
J
U
L
2
7
J
U
L
2
7
J
U
L
2
8
J
U
L
2
9
J
U
L
2
9
J
U
L
3 0
J
U
L
3
0
J
U
L
3
1
J
U
L
3 1
J
U
L
2 8 J UL
2 9 – 3 1 J U L
2 8 – 2 9
2
9
– 3 0
2
9
–
3
1
3
1
–
1
3
0
–
1
A
U
G
2
9
2
9
1 A U G
1
A
U
G
1 AU G
XX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XX
XX
XXXX
XXXX
Bois de
Grimpettes
Bois de
Cieges
Forêt de
Fère
Forêt de
Fère
Forêt de
Nesles
La Ventelette
Bois
Meunière
Hill 212
Ourcq
R
O
u
r
c
q
R
La Tieulerie Farm
Croix Rouge Farm
Le Charmel Château
Villardelle Farm
Meurcy Farm
Le Charmel
Fresnes
Courmont Ronchères
Vandières-
sous-Chatillon
Verneuil
Champvoisy
Passy
Anthenay
Lagery
Vézilly
Coulonges
Chamery
Cierges
Sergy
Nesles
Seringes-et-Nesles
Fère-en-Tardenois
Villers-
sur-Fère
Villemoyenne
Villome
Cohan
Beuvardes
C R O S S I N G T H E O U R C Q
MARNE SALIENT
26 July–1 August 1918
0
0 1
Miles31 2
2 3 Kilometers
0 100 150 200 and Above
E L E V A T I O N I N M E T E R S
Front Line, Date
American Sector
Map 7
•••• 63 ••••
26 July (Map 7). The 167th and 168th Infantry regiments learned
that they were to attack the Croix Rouge Farm position in a little
over an hour, with orders to advance almost two kilometers beyond
the farm to the edges of La Ventelette wood. The Germans had
gone to great lengths to reinforce the defenses at Croix Rouge
Farm, setting up several camouflaged machine gun positions with
overlapping fields of fire. The defending troops, which consisted
of elements of the German 23d Infantry Division and the 10th
Landwehr Division, had taken the precaution of clearing the
underbrush from the surrounding woods and painting waist-high
white or red lines on the trees as visual aids for the machine
gunners. The defenders also had access to a sizeable ammunition
cache, located about a mile from the complex, which the Germans
had stockpiled earlier in the month in preparation for the 15 July
offensive. Altogether, Croix Rouge Farm was among the more
formidable positions established inside the Marne salient. To one
Rainbow Division soldier, it seemed as if:
enemy machine gunners were almost everywhere—in trees,
behind fallen ones, and in hurriedly made “nests” on the farm
to the front . . . and all the Hun gunners had to do was sit there,
pull the triggers, and keep on loading. It was a devilish deathtrap,
a wicked device of a hellish brain!
Responsibility for assaulting this position fell to the 1st and
3d Battalions, 167th Infantry, and the 2d Battalion, 168th Infantry,
together with elements of the 151st Machine Gun Battalion. An
understrength French infantry battalion, with only about thirty
men per company, also supported the left flank of the attack. The
men from the 167th and 168th were tired and hungry, as many
had not eaten or slept in over a day and a half. Furthermore,
ammunition was slow in reaching the infantrymen on the front
lines, and the attacking battalions lacked both detailed maps
and accurate information about the enemy. They also had been
subjected to inaccurate but nonetheless deadly harassing artillery
fire throughout the better part of the day, while the Allied artillery
preparation—which had been scheduled to begin two hours
before the attack—failed to materialize. The attack therefore went
forward shortly before 1700 in less-than-ideal circumstances.
Springing up from cover and dashing toward the German
positions, across several hundred meters of farmland, the assaulting
battalions immediately came under heavy machine gun fire.
•••• 64 ••••
The 167th Infantry’s 1st Battalion sustained the attack for less than
fifteen minutes. Pinned down in the open ground surrounding the
farmhouse, it remained in place under German fire for an hour
before resuming the advance. At about 1800, ad hoc units composed
of elements of several platoons commanded by 1st Lt. Ernest E. Bell
and 1st Lt. Robert Espy, both from the 167th’s 1st Battalion, staged
simultaneous bayonet charges with a total of about 110 men. The
groups swept into the north and west sides of the farm complex,
capturing twenty-seven machine guns but suffering more than
60 percent casualties. The force then mopped up the Germans in
the farm buildings, repulsing a hasty counterattack. Groups of men
from the 168th Infantry also managed to reach the farmhouse from
the south, helping to clear out the remaining defenders. German
counterattacks ceased around 2000. By nightfall, Croix Rouge
Farm was securely in American hands—at the cost of over 1,000
casualties. The Germans destroyed their remaining ammunition
before withdrawing behind the Ourcq to the northeast. In his
memoirs, Douglas MacArthur praised the tenacity of the men of
his division who had “[crawled] forward in twos and threes against
each stubborn nest of enemy guns . . . [closing] in with the bayonet
and the hand grenade,” adding that “there was no quarter asked
or given.” He remarked elsewhere that the attack on Croix Rouge
Farm was carried out “in a manner which for its gallantry I do not
believe has been surpassed in military history.”
Croix Rouge Farm (National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 65 ••••
After staging an unsuccessful attack on 26 July—launched
at the same time as the assault on Croix Rouge Farm—the 3d
Division resumed its advance the next day. The Germans in the
3d Division’s sector had withdrawn during the night, leaving
rearguards to hold their former defensive line. Led by the 4th
Infantry, the 3d Division pushed forward almost two kilometers
to Villardelle Farm. The 42d Division also moved forward in the
afternoon, encountering little enemy resistance south of the Ourcq
River and occupying the town of Villers-sur-Fère. Machine gun fire
from strong defensive positions to the north of the river, however,
prevented the Rainbow Division from crossing. During the night
of 27–28 July, the 28th Division’s 55th Brigade, previously held in
the XXXVIII Corps’ reserve, relieved the French 39th Division,
taking over a two-and-a-half-kilometer front between the 42d and
the 3d Divisions.
Elements of three American divisions, operating as part of two
corps in the French Sixth Army, now occupied a continuous line
along the Ourcq River from the outskirts of Villemoyenne in the
west to the vicinity of Ronchères in the east. American units held
the entire frontage of both the I Corps and the French XXXVIII
Corps. The fighting along the Ourcq was, as one doughboy later
expressed it, “a straight issue between Americans and Germans.”
In subsequent days, American divisions played a decisive role in
forcing a crossing over the Ourcq, and thus in destroying the last
tenable German position in the Marne salient south of the Vesle.
Crossing the Ourcq
The Allied assault on the Ourcq began in earnest in the early
morning of 28 July. Elements of the 42d Division soon gained a
foothold across the river, with the 166th, 165th, 167th, and 168th
Infantry regiments—in order from left to right—attacking in
line. The 168th Infantry launched a costly assault with limited
artillery support on Hill 212, a “dome-like eminence” located
on the north bank of the Ourcq a little over a half-kilometer to
the southeast of Sergy. Although heavily defended, the German
position on the west face of the hill had largely collapsed by
0800. The 167th Infantry also gained a foothold a little to the
west of the 168th. The 167th and 168th contested control of Sergy
throughout the day—at least two platoons belonging to the 1st
Battalion, 167th Infantry, entered the village—but could not
secure it before nightfall.
•••• 66 ••••
On the 42d Division’s left, the 165th and 166th Infantry regiments
stormed across the river, halting in front of German defenses located
around Seringes-et-Nesles and Meurcy Farm. The entrenched
German position at Seringes-et-Nesles, which MacArthur described
as “like a small Gibraltar,” put up especially stubborn resistance.
Heavy artillery fire from the Forêt de Nesles limited progress in this
sector, and by the end of the day both regiments of the 83d Brigade
had withdrawn back across the Ourcq.
For the 28th Division, to the 42d Division’s right, German
resistance was equally resolute. Attacking in the morning, two
battalions of the 55th Brigade’s 110th Infantry reached the Ourcq
by noon, although machine gun fire from the Bois des Grimpettes
prevented a further advance. To the right of the 55th Brigade, the
3d Division (supported by the neighboring French 4th Division)
captured Ronchères around 1500. At 1630, the 3d Division’s 5th
Brigade, together with the 55th Brigade, launched a renewed
attack. Although the 3d Division troops pushed only a few hundred
meters beyond Ronchères, elements of the 55th Brigade succeeded
in crossing the Ourcq and advancing some distance toward the
Bois de Grimpettes before heavy fire compelled them to pull back
to the river.
Picking off German snipers (National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 67 ••••
Attacks against the German positions on the Ourcq continued
on 29 July. The 4th Division, which had entered into the I Corps’
reserve after participating in the initial offensive between 18 and 20
July, took part in attacks along the Ourcq during this day. General
Liggett attached elements of the 47th Infantry and the 11th Machine
Gun Battalion to the 42d Division on 28 July, and the 47th Infantry
accordingly supported the 168th Infantry’s attacks near Sergy,
which began shortly before 0900. The 47th Infantry’s Companies L
and I (both part of 3d Battalion) entered Sergy from the west and
east, under the overall command of Lt. Col. Gulielmus V. Heidt.
Company L fought its way through the majority of the village,
taking severe casualties, while Company I also pushed in from
the east. Both companies withdrew around 1700 when Sergy came
under heavy fire from German artillery. The savage fighting in the
village took a heavy toll on the command structure of the 47th
Infantry, as the 3d Battalion lost a series of commanding officers
in quick succession. Heidt was hit before the 3d Battalion entered
the woods near the Ourcq, and his successor, Maj. James P. Cole,
was wounded just after the battalion entered Sergy. Capt. Louis
T. Roberts then briefly assumed command before being wounded
by shellfire. His replacement, Capt. Ross Snyder of Company M,
was killed later in the day.
Meanwhile, the two regiments of the 42d Division’s 83d
Brigade overcame three more German strongpoints in fighting
that continued through the late afternoon. The 165th Infantry
assaulted and captured Meurcy Farm and the nearby Bois Colas.
The town of Seringes-et-Nesles also fell to the 2d Battalion, 166th
Infantry, around 1800 after “desperate resistance” by the German
defenders. The Germans refused to surrender, and the Americans
were disinclined to take prisoners. MacArthur described the scene
in his memoirs:
I formed our infantry on the south bank of the stream and rushed
the town. Their artillery concentrated, their machine guns east
and west of the town raked us fore and aft, but nothing could stop
the impetus of that mad charge. We forded the river. We ascended
the slopes. We seized Hill 184. We killed the garrison in the town
to a man. At dusk on July 29th we were in sole possession.
With this, Genera l Menoher a n nounced— somewhat
prematurely—that “the backbone of the enemy’s resistance on
the heights north of the OURCQ [had been] broken.”
•••• 68 ••••
In the 28th Division’s sector, attacks resumed on 29 July at about
0445 after a brief preparatory artillery bombardment. The division’s
orders envisioned an initial advance of at least six kilometers to
a position north of Villome and Coulonges. General de Mondésir,
however, had more ambitious plans for the day. Imagining that the
Germans were in full retreat, he instructed the leading elements of
XXXVIII Corps to establish outposts as far north as Mont-Notre-
Dame and Mont-Saint-Martin—almost fifteen kilometers from
the Ourcq. German resistance, however, was much stronger than
anticipated, and the 110th Infantry had barely advanced as far as the
Bois des Grimpettes by 0915 before retiring in the face of heavy fire.
A second assault, beginning at 1700, made minimal progress at the
cost of heavy casualties. The 3d Division’s 4th Infantry regiment also
made an attack around 0650 but was repulsed, and the 32d Division
moved forward to relieve the 3d Division during the night of 29–30
July. A German report summarizing the events of the day simply
stated that the attacks to the east of Sergy on 29 July “collapsed
before our front lines.”
The 32d Division, commanded by Maj. Gen. William G. Haan,
formally took command of the 3d Division’s sector in the morning
of 30 July. A late arrival to France, the 32d Division originally had
been assigned to the I Corps to receive further training and serve
Soldiers of the 167th Infantry in combat near Seringes-et-Nesles
(National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 69 ••••
as a pool of replacements for frontline units. Redesignated as a
combat division on 10 April, the 32d held quiet sectors on the front
lines for some time during May and June before moving to support
the French Sixth Army’s offensive against the Marne salient in late
July. At 1000, the 2d Battalion, 127th Infantry, launched an assault
on the Bois de Cierges and the Bois des Grimpettes in support
of the 28th Division, which had attacked with artillery support
earlier in the morning. Although the 28th Division’s 110th Infantry
had managed to enter the Bois des Grimpettes before 0600, parts
of the wood remained in German hands and the 127th Infantry’s
supporting attack made little progress. At 1430, the 28th and 32d
Divisions made simultaneous assaults following a twenty-minute
artillery bombardment. Advancing behind a rolling barrage, the
infantry pushed through the Bois des Grimpettes toward the
village of Cierges. The 110th Infantry finally secured the wood,
mopping up the Germans remaining in the area. Elements of the
127th Infantry also occupied the southwestern portion of the Bois
de Cierges. The 55th Brigade withdrew from the line during the
night of 30–31 July, relinquishing its sector to the 32d Division’s
63d Infantry Brigade. In three days of fighting near the Ourcq
River, the 55th Brigade had suffered more than 1,400 casualties.
With the 28th Division’s withdrawal, the 32d Division occupied
the entire XXXVIII Corps’ front.
The 42d Division made little progress on 30 July. A ninety-
minute artillery bombardment preceded an unsuccessful attack
at 0900 by two battalions of the 47th Infantry, with support from
the 168th and 167th Infantry. To the west, the 165th Infantry made
a small advance before repelling a German counterattack directed
toward Meurcy Farm.
Further assaults undertaken during the afternoon of the next
day achieved equally little. The 1st Gas Regiment (formerly the
30th Engineers) brought about the largest advance in the 42d
Division’s sector on 31 July, forcing the Germans to retreat from
their position just to the north of Meurcy Farm, in the Bois Brulé.
The 32d Division fared somewhat better, assaulting Cierges after
a thirty-minute artillery bombardment. The town fell to the 1st
Battalion, 127th Infantry, around 1630. Further attacks beyond
that point, however, were unsuccessful. By the end of the day,
the 32d Division held a line running from Hill 212 in the west to a
point about a kilometer east of Cierges.
Both the 42d and 32d Divisions launched further attacks on
1 August, but the German defenses continued to hold. The two
•••• 70 ••••
American outfits succeeded in pushing the Allied line forward
about a kilometer at most. German counterattacks continued to
hinder progress, especially within the 42d Division’s sector.
Allied efforts elsewhere in the Marne salient were more
successful. Mangin’s French Tenth Army returned to the offensive
on the morning of 1 August, capturing several villages near the
heights of Grand-Rozoy, about six kilometers to the west of the
42d Division’s sector. French and British divisions then held the
position against repeated German counterattacks. During the night
of 1–2 August, the Germans withdrew the bulk of their forces to a
new defensive line along the Vesle, an unfordable but shallow river
about thirty-five feet wide. The last German troops withdrew from
Soissons on 2 August. By that time, the decisive phase of the Second
Battle of the Marne had come to an end. The Marne salient, which
at the beginning of July had appeared to threaten Paris, was now
reduced to a sliver of territory between the Chemin des Dames and
the Vesle River. Meanwhile, the British were preparing for their
own offensive near Amiens, scheduled to begin on 8 August. The
Germans were on the defensive, and the Allies did not intend to give
their opponents any opportunity to regain the initiative.
Relief of the 7th Infantry west of Moulins (National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 71 ••••
The Pursuit to the Vesle
The American divisions along the Ourcq discovered the
German withdrawal early in the morning on 2 August and
immediately began a pursuit. Caught in the middle of being relieved
by the 4th Division, and exhausted after more than a week of
unremitting combat, however, the Rainbow Division made only a
limited advance. The 165th Infantry’s regimental chaplain, Francis
P. Duffy, recalled that General MacArthur “wanted a last effort
made by his Division. He called on one regiment, then on another,
for a further advance. Their commanders said truthfully that
the men were utterly fatigued and unable to go forward another
step.” At the same time, the 32d Division drove forward about
six kilometers, occupying the villages of Chamery, Coulonges,
Cohan, and Dravegny. German resistance throughout the day was
generally light, although the small groups serving as rearguard
detachments did their best to impede Allied progress. During
the evening, the 4th Division completed the relief of the Rainbow
Division, which accordingly passed into the I Corps’ reserve. The
42d Division was severely depleted, having suffered more than a
thousand dead and 5,476 total casualties since joining the battle
along the Ourcq.
General Liggett later praised the Rainbow Division for its
conduct during the fighting in the Marne salient, writing in his
memoirs that “no Division in the Army could have acquitted
itself better than did the 42nd Division in the crucial fighting on
the North bank of the Ourcq River. It proved itself a first class
Division in every sense; swift in attack, and tenacious in both
attack and defense.” Father Duffy described the battle’s impact on
his regiment, referring to the 165th by its original National Guard
designation, the 69th Infantry, in somewhat more personal terms:
In this one battle nearly half our strength is gone. We have lost
fifty-nine officers and thirteen hundred men and of these thirteen
officers and about two hundred men have been killed outright.
Many of our wounded have been badly hurt. . . . But in spite
of losses and sorrow and sickness I find the men surprisingly
cheerful and willing to carry on. They have what soldiers
most wish for, Victory. And they know now that the men who
opposed their path and had to give way to their persistence
were the famous Prussian Guards, of the very flower of the
German Military Machine. The old 69th had again lived up to its
•••• 72 ••••
reputation of the past; there were no German troops; no troops
in the world that could withstand its stubborn bravery.
Taking the Rainbow Division’s place in the line, the 4th
Division—now operating for the first time as a complete unit under
General Cameron’s overall command—prepared to continue the
Allied advance to the Vesle (Map 8).
The pursuit resumed on 3 August, as the 4th Division pushed
forward between three and eight kilometers. German machine
gun nests located north of Chéry-Chartreuve and in the Bois de
Bazoches caused some delays, but the Germans abandoned both
positions during the afternoon. The 32d Division also advanced,
reaching a point less than two kilometers from the Vesle. General
Degoutte ordered the Allied divisions to establish bridgeheads on
the north bank of the Vesle during the night of 3–4 August, but
neither American division attempted to cross the river at that time.
The small riverside town of Fismes, located in the 32d Division’s
sector on the south side of the Vesle—opposite its smaller twin,
Fismette—also remained in German hands. During the night, the
French XXXVIII Corps yielded control of its sector to General
Bullard’s III Army Corps. General de Mondésir and the rest of the
XXXVIII Corps headquarters staff passed into the Sixth Army’s
reserve. This was the first time in the war that two American army
corps operated in tandem on the same front.
The battle continued early on 4 August as both the 4th and 32d
Divisions attempted to cross the Vesle. The 4th Division reached
the river but was unable to cross, although the French 62d Division,
to the left of the 4th Division, did secure a foothold across the river
in its sector. The 32d Division attacked in the afternoon, and the
3d Battalion, 127th Infantry, occupied part of Fismes late in the
evening, fighting street-by-street against the German defenders.
Although the Germans retreated from their positions between
the Ourcq and the Vesle without putting up much of a fight, they
had transformed Fismes and Fismette into veritable fortresses.
One 32d Division veteran later recalled that the Germans “had
spared no effort in making this city and surrounding country as
impregnable as science could make it. Huge stores of ammunition
and engines of destruction were located here and preparations
made to withstand the most formidable attack.” The two towns
would become the site of fierce fighting over the following weeks.
The next two days saw relatively little combat, as heavy
rainfall and solidifying German resistance prevented the 32d and
X X
4
X X
42
X X
32
X X
Fr 62
X X
Fr 4
X X X
I
X X X
1–5 Aug
III Fr
X X X
1–4 Aug
XXXVIII Fr
X X X
4–6 Aug
III
X X X
1–5 Aug
II Fr
1AUG
1
A
U
G
2 A U G
2
A
U
G
3 AU G
3
A
U
G
4
A
U
G
6
A
U
G
4
–
6
A
U
G
4
A
U
G
4
A
U
G
4
–
5
5
6
6
5
A
U
G
5
–
6
A
U G
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XX
Bois de
Grimpettes
Bois de
Cieges
Bois de
Voizelle
Bois
Meunière
Forêt de
Nesles
La Ventelette
Hill 212
Ourc
q
R
A r d r e R
O
r
i
l
l
o
u
R
V
e
s
l
e
R
V es
l
e
R
V e s l e R
Croix Rouge Farm
Le Charmel Château
Fère-en-Tardenois
Château
Villardelle
Farm
Meurcy Farm
Le Charmel
Fresnes
Courmont
Ronchères
Champvoisy
Passy
Vézilly
Coulonges
Chamery
Cierges
Sergy
Nesles
Seringes-
et-Nesles
Fère-
en-Tardenois
Villers-
sur-Fère
Villome
Cohan
Dravegny
Chéry-Chartreuve
Mont-St.-Martin
Jouaignes
Bazoches
Mont-Notre-Dame
Fismes
Fismette
Villette
Courville
Mareuil-
en-Dôle
P U R S U I T T O T H E V E S L E
MARNE SALIENT
1–6 August 1918
0
0 1
Miles41 2
2 3 4 Kilometers
3
0 100 150 200 and Above
E L E V A T I O N I N M E T E R S
Front Line, Date
American Sector
Map 8
•••• 74 ••••
4th Divisions from making significant progress. The 32d Division
sent a few patrols across the Vesle on 5 August, while the 127th
Infantry improved its position in Fismes, largely evicting the
Germans from the town. The 4th Division, meanwhile, defeated a
limited German counterattack early in the morning on 5 August,
and elements of the 39th and 58th Infantry regiments established
several footholds across the river but abandoned all of them by
nightfall. The 32d Division made no attack on 6 August, while
the 4th Division undertook a small-scale advance. Small groups
belonging to the 39th Infantry succeeded in crossing the Vesle, but
withdrew to the southern bank by the end of the day. The German
defensive line on the Vesle River remained largely intact.
The desultory fighting on 6 August marked the end of the Second
Battle of the Marne. The 28th Division returned to the line—refreshed
after a brief period in reserve—relieving the 32d Division on 7
August, while the 4th Division remained in position until relieved
by the 77th Division on the night of 11–12 August. Casualties during
the final phase of the fighting had been relatively light compared to
the shocking losses earlier in the offensive. The 4th Division lost
1,625 men between 3 and 6 August, while the 32d Division—which
German machine gun team firing on infantry from the
28th Division (National Archives)
•••••••••••••••
•••• 75 ••••
had been in the line between 30 July and 6 August—suffered 3,662
casualties. The battle around Fismes and Fismette dragged on
until late August, as American divisions sought to wrest the area
from German control, but from a strategic perspective this was a
subsidiary operation. Foch, who had been promoted to Marshal
of France on 5 August, recognized that further large-scale efforts
against the Vesle would only bring diminishing returns. Instead
of battering at the German defensive positions there, Foch placed
his hopes in the long-awaited offensive by the British Fourth Army
near Amiens, scheduled for 8 August. The next major Allied blow
would inaugurate the period known as the “Hundred Days”: three
months of unremitting Allied offensives that pushed the Germans
back more than a hundred kilometers and culminated, in November
1918, with the collapse of Imperial Germany.
analySiS
In his memoirs, Erich Ludendorff claimed that 8 August 1918,
the first day of the British offensive at Amiens, was the “black day
of the German Army in the history of this war.” The attack launched
on that day was a true coalition effort. British tanks, supported
primarily by Australian and Canadian infantry with help from
elements of the American 33d Division, inflicted a terrible defeat on
the German Army, capturing some 18,500 prisoners and 374 guns
and advancing nearly thirteen kilometers. Subsequent days would
bring further disasters for the Germans; from August onward,
the German Army was in almost continuous retreat.
The Battle of Amiens undoubtedly was a significant Allied
victory, but it is doubtful whether it would have had the impact it
did if not for the Allied counteroffensive on the Marne. The Second
Battle of the Marne created the necessary conditions for the Allied
victory at Amiens. In a real sense, therefore, the “Hundred Days”
offensive began on 18 July, not 8 August. Ludendorff may have
downplayed the significance of the defeat on the Marne, but other
German leaders recognized the importance of what had occurred.
German chancellor Georg von Hertling, for example, described his
response to the defeat of M arneschutz-reiMs and the beginning of
the Allied offensive at Soissons:
At the beginning of July, 1918 I was convinced, I confess it, that
before the first of September our adversaries would send us
peace proposals. . . . We expected grave events in Paris for the
•••• 76 ••••
end of July. That was on the 15th. On the 18th even the most
optimistic among us knew that all was lost. The history of the
world was played out in three days.
On the other side, Foch was especially proud of the victory
the Allied armies had achieved, tallying the “30,000 prisoners,
more than 600 guns, 200 mine throwers, and 3,000 machine guns
captured,” and noting that the collapse of the Marne salient both
eliminated the threat to Paris and shortened the Allied front by
about forty-five kilometers. Even more importantly, however, “a
victorious counter offensive had once more placed in our hands
the initiative of operations and the power to direct the progress
of events in this long, vast war.”
The reality of this achievement was not lost on the soldiers
of the AEF, who were well aware of the leading role that
American troops had played in the fighting in the Marne salient.
In his memoirs, Pershing was far from modest about the decisive
importance of the American participation in the Second Battle of
the Marne:
While our forces had played important rôles in halting earlier
German offensives, there were available here for the first time
sufficient American divisions to join with those of the Allies in
striking a decisive blow. The power of American arms brought
to bear in the Marne salient made it possible to crush the last
enemy offensive and commit him entirely to the defensive. . . .
The preponderance of Americans at the critical points of this
offensive, coupled with their successes in the vital areas of the
battle, brought about this victory.
This victory nevertheless came at a heavy cost. About 39,672
out of the roughly 270,000 Americans who fought in the Second
Battle of the Marne became casualties. Total Allied losses in the
battle amounted to 95,165 men. Several factors explain the high
casualty toll suffered by the American divisions on the Marne.
Foremost among these is the relative inexperience of the American
soldiers. General Liggett commented in his history of the war that
Americans “endlessly took chances that no French soldier in his
right mind would have chanced; nor would our men had they been
fighting since 1914.” The eagerness and impetuosity of American
soldiers was both a product of, and to some extent a substitute for,
their lack of experience. “The courage of our young Army was not
•••• 77 ••••
always wise,” Liggett wrote, “yet it served to end the war of 1918.
Courage sometimes is the only substitute for the skill that comes of
experience.” He recalled how the commander of the 1st Moroccan
Division, observing the American attack at Soissons, professed to
“weep for the families and sweethearts of these Americans. See
how they went into battle as we did in 1914! My division, the flower
of the French Army, no longer can keep up with them.”
American dash and élan account for the dramatic advances
that American troops routinely made as well as the appallingly
heavy casualties they suffered in these advances. The spirited
attacks of the 6th Regiment at Soissons on 19 July and the 167th and
168th Infantry regiments at Croix Rouge Farm on 26 July exemplify
the American willingness to fight and advance with almost no
regard for losses. Nevertheless, fighting in this manner wore out
units rapidly, making them less effective in subsequent actions.
Impetuous attacks likewise led to American units frequently
outpacing neighboring French formations during the advance.
As a consequence, entire American divisions sometimes found
themselves exposed to enfilading fire as well as counterattacks
directed toward their flanks. These advances undoubtedly were
dramatic, but American units might have profited from slowing
their progress to stay in step with their Allied counterparts.
Similarly, even though relations with individual French
soldiers were generally good and many French generals praised
the American soldiers who fought under their command, French
and American units often failed to apprise each other of their
dispositions, leading to considerable confusion on the battlefield.
The most egregious example of this was the retreat of the French
125th Division on 15 July, which the French executed without
informing the four attached companies of the 28th Division. It
remains unclear why the French did not warn the four companies
about the retreat. Likewise, American officers were sometimes
less than forthcoming in their communications with their French
counterparts and superiors.
Although these problems reduced Allied effectiveness, they
cannot detract from the significance of what the AEF achieved.
Despite the limitations imposed by inexperience and sometimes
rocky relations with their French allies, American divisions played
a pivotal role in the battle that decided the course of the First World
War on the Western Front. They would carry the experience gained
on the Marne to their subsequent engagements in September
through November 1918.
•••• 78 ••••
•••
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Stephen C. McGeorge has served as deputy chief historian, U.S.
Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), since April
2007. As a serving Army officer, he completed an M.A. in history
under Dr. Ted Wilson and served on the Leavenworth faculty at the
Combat Studies Institute as a military history instructor. Following
his retirement, he was director of the Oregon Military Museum;
TRADOC historian for the Stryker Brigade Combat Teams at Fort
Lewis, Washington; and chief collections curator for the National
Museum of the United States Army.
Mason W. Watson is a history Ph.D. student at Ohio State
University, where he has taught courses in military and European
history. He received his B.A. from the College of William and Mary
in 2012 and his M.A. from Ohio State in 2016. His dissertation deals
with the interwar British Army and the memory of the First World
War. He is currently serving as a graduate research assistant at
the U.S. Army Center of Military History.
•••• 79 ••••
•••
FURTHER READINGS
Doughty, Robert A. Pyrrhic Victory: French Strategy and
Operations in the Great War. Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press, 2005.
Grotelueschen, Mark E. The AEF Way of War: The American Army
and Combat in World War I. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2007.
Harris, Stephen L. Rock of the Marne: The American Soldiers
Who Turned the Tide Against the Kaiser in World War I.
New York: Berkley Caliber, 2015.
Johnson, Douglas V. II, and Hillman, Rolfe L. Jr. Soissons 1918.
College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 1999.
Lengel, Edward G. Thunder and Flames: Americans in the
Crucible of Combat, 1917–1918. Lawrence: University Press
of Kansas, 2015.
Neiberg, Michael S. The Second Battle of the Marne. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 2008.
Pershing, John J. My Experiences in the First World War. New
York: Da Capo Press, 1995. (Originally published New York:
Frederick A. Stokes Co., 1931.)
Woodward, David R. The American Army and the First World
War. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Zabecki, David T. The German 1918 Offensives: A Case Study in
the Operational Level of War. London: Routledge, 2006.
For more information on the U.S. Army in World War I,
please visit the U.S. Army Center of Military History Web site
(www.history.army.mil).
PIN : 203355–000
CHAMPAGNE-MARNE 1918
AISNE-MARNE 1918